Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphm20
Psychology, Health & Medicine
ISSN: 1354-8506 (Print) 1465-3966 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cphm20
Towards a framework for preventing community
violence among youth
Thomas P. Abt
To cite this article:  Thomas P. Abt (2017) Towards a framework for preventing community
violence among youth, Psychology, Health & Medicine, 22:sup1, 266-285, DOI:
10.1080/13548506.2016.1257815
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13548506.2016.1257815
© 2016 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 14 Dec 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 12458
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 9 View citing articles 

Psychology , health & Medicine, 2017
Vol. 22, no . s1, 266–285
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13548506.2016.1257815
Towards a framework for preventing community violence 
among youth
Thomas P . Abt 
center for i nternational d evelopment, harvard Kennedy s chool, c ambridge, Massachusetts, Usa
ABSTRACT
This article, in an effort to assist the selection and deployment of 
evidence-informed strategies, proposes a new conceptual framework 
for responding to community violence  among youth. First, the 
phenomenon of community violence is understood in context using a 
new violence typology organized along a continuum. Second, the need 
for a new anti-community violence framework is established. Third, a 
framework is developed, blending concepts from the fields of public safety and public health. Fourth, evidence from systematic reviews and meta-analyses concerning community violence is summarized and categorized. Finally, an anti-violence framework populated with 
evidence-informed strategies is presented and discussed.
Introduction
In 2012 alone, 95,000 children and young people under the age of 20 were murdered, 
constituting almost 20% of all homicides (UNICEF, 2014). 90% of these young victims 
lived in low- and middle-income countries, and especially in Latin America and the 
Caribbean where the highest homicide rates for children and adolescents are found. Boys 
are at particular risk for homicide, accounting for 70% of victims less than 20 years of age, 
particularly during late adolescence (ages 15–19), when 57% of all violent deaths among 
young victims occur. Violent death at any age is brutal and tragic, but particularly so for 
children, as their innocence and powerlessness belies personal culpability and heightens 
our sense of unfulfilled potential and lost opportunity.
This article primarily concerns the violence, particularly lethal violence, which occurs 
among youth under the age of 20 and in community settings. While young people are the 
main focus, this content is also relevant for those in young adulthood and beyond. This arti -
cle draws heavily from a comprehensive study of community violence reduction strategies 
recently completed by the author and Christopher Winship, the Diker-Tishman Professor 
of Sociology at Harvard University, “What Works in Reducing Community Violence: A 
Meta-Review and Field Study for the Northern Triangle” (Abt & Winship, 2016). That 
study’s meta-review synthesized the results of 43 systematic reviews and meta-analyses of KEYWORDS
Violence prevention; youth 
violence; community violence; evidence-based; evidence-informedARTICLE HISTORY
Received 18 s eptember 2016 
accepted 27 o ctober 2016
© 2016 the a uthor(s). Published by i nforma UK limited, trading as taylor & Francis group.
this is an open a ccess article distributed under the terms of the creative c ommons a ttribution-nonc ommercial-nod erivatives license 
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.CONTACT thomas P . abt   thomas_abt@hks.harvard.edu OPEN AC CESS
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    267
violence reduction programs, aggregating over 1400 individual programmatic evaluations 
in order to identify ‘what works’ in reducing community violence.
Systematic reviews use predetermined methods to identify, select, appraise, and combine 
the results from individual studies in a clear, unbiased, and systematic manner. Meta-analyses combine quantitative data from individual studies using established statistical 
techniques. Both are designed to overcome limits to the external validity of individual 
studies (Killias & Villetaz, 2008). These techniques have grown popular as scholars recognize 
their usefulness for identifying themes and patterns across large numbers of empirical 
studies (Makarios & Pratt, 2012), and are being employed with increasing frequency in 
medicine, education, criminal justice, and other fields (Aos, Miller, & Drake, 2006).
Only causal evidence, i.e. evidence identifying a causal relationship between an 
intervention and its intended effect, was considered in the underlying report. The same is true here. While an emphasis on rigorous evidence, i.e. causal evidence drawn from high 
quality experimental or quasi-experimental designs, has advantages in terms of accuracy, 
reliability, and transparency, there are at least three significant limitations associated with 
such an approach. First, it is important to remain mindful that public policy cannot be based 
exclusively on science. Evidence and data should be used to improve public policy decisions, 
not replace them entirely (Robinson & Abt, 2016), which is why the phrase ‘evidence-
informed’ will be used here instead of the more recognized term ‘evidence-based’ . Second, 
the vast majority of rigorous research has been conducted in high-income settings, so 
conclusions drawn from such studies may be of limited external validity when applied in 
low- or middle-income settings. Third, focusing on causal evidence creates a bias in favor of 
the programmatic interventions capable of generating such evidence. Evaluating institutions 
or systems is a much more complicated exercise where establishing causality may be difficult 
or even impossible. Nevertheless, a sound understanding of the causal evidence, albeit mostly 
from high-income counties and programmatic evaluations, can enhance understanding and 
improve decision-making with regard to community violence prevention.
Community violence, defined and described
The term ‘community violence’ is best understood in context alongside other forms of violence. While the World Health Organization (WHO) (Krug, Mercy, Dahlberg, & Zwi, 
2002 ), United Nations (UNODC, 2013 ), and others divide violence into discrete categories, 
these schemas generally fail to conform to actual violence as witnessed or experienced on the ground. In reality, violence comes in many forms, all containing similarities and 
dissimilarities, each independent from and dependent on the others. To better capture 
this complexity and provide meaningful guidance to practitioners in field, violence may 
be better understood according to a set of six attributes described along an admittedly 
imperfect continuum.
First, violence varies in its lethality or capacity to cause serious physical injury – a shove 
versus a fatal shooting. Second, it occurs in different settings – in the privacy of one’s home 
or on a public street. Third, the number of individuals involved may be few, as with a dispute 
between neighbors, or many, as with conflicts among gangs. Fourth, violence may be as spontaneous as a bar brawl or as methodically planned as an assassination. Fifth, it may be 
expressive of emotions, including anger, or instrumental in its aim of achieving a particular 
goal. Sixth and finally, incidents of violence may occur as frequently as domestic disputes or as rarely as formally declared wars between states.
268   T. P . ABT
These six attributes are strongly, but not perfectly, associated with each other. To capture 
these associations we collapse them into a single dimension along a continuum (Figure 1). 
Obviously, this continuum is neither entirely complete nor perfectly accurate, but viewing 
violence along a continuum is a helpful means of understanding the relationships between 
different forms of violence while avoiding overly simplistic categories.
The typology in Figure 1 describes six forms of violence: violence between family mem-
bers and/or intimate partners in the home; violence involving students at school; violence 
between and among community members; violence committed by gang members; violence 
committed by organized criminal groups; and violence between nation states, i.e. war. These 
categories are intended to be illustrative, not exhaustive, and do not single out specific populations, i.e. men, women, children, or the elderly. Community violence is emphasized 
because it is the focus of this paper. Organized and state violence are de-emphasized here 
because they are less likely to involve children or young people directly, although there are 
notable exceptions, e.g. child assassins and soldiers.
At one end of the continuum, violence is interpersonal, i.e. generally occurring 
between individuals known to one other. Individual incidents occur frequently but are 
rarely lethal or cause permanent physical injury. It is unplanned, disorganized, emotional, 
and impulsive in nature. This violence is traditionally viewed a private matter, occurring 
between family members, intimate partners, schoolmates, or friends. If addressed by 
public institutions, it will likely involve a wide array of public health stakeholders with 
limited law enforcement participation, if any. Bullying is one example of violence at this 
end of the continuum.
At the opposite end, violence occurs between groups, often large in size, where individ-
uals are generally not known to one another. Unlike bullying, this violence occurs infre-
quently but is highly lethal, often resulting in significant numbers of casualties. It is planned, 
organized, and instrumental. This violence is a generally state matter and traditionally the 
province of law enforcement and military institutions. Formally declared conflicts between 
states exemplify the violence at this end of the continuum.Figure 1. t ypology of violence continuum.
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    269
In the middle of this continuum lies community violence, the focus of this article. 
Community violence, particularly homicide, occurs primarily in public settings. It is inter -
personal, i.e. taking place between individuals and small groups that may or may not know 
one another. It is loosely planned at best and generally impulsive in nature. That said, the 
impact of community violence is nevertheless severe, often resulting in death or disabling 
injury. Its perpetrators and victims are usually, but not exclusively, young men and boys 
from disadvantaged backgrounds and communities. Community violence may result from 
disputes or from conventional forms of street crime, e.g. robberies, and implicates both the public health and public safety fields as well as multi-disciplinary, multi-sector responses.
As noted previously, all forms of violence are interconnected. The contagion between dif -
ferent forms of violence is an important subject worthy of serious exploration but lies beyond 
the scope of this article.
Establishing the need for a community violence framework
While it is clear that all violence is interrelated, it is equally clear that the differing charac-
teristics of various forms of violence necessitate differing approaches – there is no universal 
strategy for violence prevention, nor should there be. For instance, a key component of any strategy is deciding the number and type of partners to be mobilized. In this regard, 
responses to violence will vary greatly – a response to bullying may involve coalitions of 
educators and parents, while addressing organized criminal violence typically demands the 
coordination of law enforcement groups. Community violence is perhaps unique in the 
breadth of stakeholders who may contribute to an effective response, including children and 
parents; community, business, and faith-based leaders; social service and health providers; 
along with law enforcement and criminal justice agencies.
This broad range of partners is appropriate given that community violence is a pervasive, 
persistent, and complex socioeconomic phenomenon. Understanding it requires a multi-
disciplinary approach. Addressing it demands a multi-sector response. In order to properly 
organize any collective response, a framework is necessary to coordinate the activities of individual components so that they help rather than hinder one another in pursuit of a 
common goal: diminished community violence. According to the National Academy of 
Sciences, ‘ As the global community recognizes the connection between violence and failure 
to achieve health and development goals, a resource such as an evidence-based framework 
could more effectively inform policies and funding priorities locally, nationally, and globally’ 
(Carroll, Perez, & Taylor, 2014).
In order to be useful, a framework must be theoretically sound but also grounded in 
the empirical reality of the problem it seeks to address. It must also have practical utility 
for implementation in the field. As criminologist Lawrence Sherman has noted, ‘Crime 
should be classified in whatever way supports crime prevention’ (Sherman, 2012). In short, 
an effective framework for responding to community violence must clearly articulate a 
reasonably complete, accurate, and useful description of both the problem and its solution.
Blending public safety and public health: a proposed framework
While many fields have made contributions to the study and practice of community vio-
lence prevention, public safety and public health outpace the others by a significant margin.  
270   T. P . ABT
A framework for preventing community violence should therefore look to these disciplines 
first for organizing insights and principles. There are many differences between them, and 
the two fields occasionally compete for attention and resources, but fortunately public safety 
and public health professionals have become increasingly collaborative, drawn together by 
their shared interest in promoting peace and reducing violence. In fact, the future success of 
violence prevention depends in part on the continued strength of this critical partnership.
In describing the challenge posed by community violence, a framework can begin by 
drawing from a number of complementary criminological perspectives, most fundamentally 
rational choice and routine activities theory. Rational choice theory posits that criminals are 
self-interested rational decision-makers who weigh the costs and benefits of their conduct, 
albeit imperfectly, before acting (Cornish & Clarke, 2008). Routine activities theory holds 
that crime occurs when likely offenders meet suitable targets in the absence of capable 
guardians (Figure 2 ) (Cohen & Felson, 1979), and where the likelihood of such convergence 
is considered a function of the routine activity patterns of all concerned.
Next, the routine activities framework is amended to reflect that community violence 
occurs at the confluence of many factors, perhaps best summarized using the well-known 
journalistic and investigative trope of the five Ws and one H, i.e. who, what, when, where, 
why, and how. If community violence is ‘what happened’ , then such violence is a function 
of place (‘where it happened’), time (‘when it happened’), people (‘who was involved’), the 
motivations of those involved (‘why it happened’), and behavior (‘how it happened’), all of 
which can be crudely formulized as follows and as visualized in Figure 3:
With the additional elements in place, this expanded formula can account for any num-
ber of criminological  theories concerning the causes of crime and violence. Biological, psychological, and developmental theories influence people, or p
e. Social, cultural, and 
environmental theories impact either the social or physical environment, i.e. place or pl. All 
of these theories affect motivations and behavior, i.e. m  and b. Lastly, this framework can be cv=f/parenleft.s1pl,t,pe,m,b/parenright.s1
Figure 2. Routine activities theory.
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    271
consolidated by merging time into place and motivation into people (Figure 4 ). Community 
violence, in this simplified equation, becomes a function of places, people, and behaviors:
Critically, understanding community violence in this manner reflects how such violence 
actually behaves in the real world. One of the most powerful criminological findings from 
the past two decades is that community violence is sticky, clustering tightly in specific places, 
among specific people, and around specific behaviors. In Boston, 1% of youth aged 15–24 
were responsible for over 50% of city-wide shootings, and 70% of total shootings over a 
three decade period were concentrated in ‘hot spots’ covering approximately 5% of the 
city’s geography (Braga & Winship, 2015). In five Latin American cities, 50% of homicides 
occur in 1.59% of blocks (CAF, 2014). In most metropolitan areas, .5% of the population is 
responsible for 75% of the homicides (Muggah, 2015). Given that all the ‘available empirical cv=f/parenleft.s1pl,pe,b/parenright.s1Figure 3. c ommunity violence theory, full version.
Figure 4. c ommunity violence theory, simplified version.
272   T. P . ABT
and theoretical evidence suggests that crime is concentrated at a small number of high-
risk places during high-risk times and generated by a small number of very risky people’ 
(Braga, 2015), the evidentiary foundation for this conclusion is strong enough to warrant 
organizing policies around it. In addition to places and people, community violence also 
concentrates around high-risk behaviors, including (1) carrying a firearm (typically illegally) 
(Koper & Mayo-Wilson, 2006), (2) being under the influence of alcohol (WHO, 2010), and  
(3) belonging to a gang or otherwise violent group of individuals (Decker, 1996).
In addition, understanding community violence in terms of places, people, and behaviors 
is more easily grasped and readily implemented by practitioners than other conceptual 
frameworks. Hot spot and problem-oriented policing strategies, for instance, have been 
disseminated around the globe, familiarizing many law enforcement agencies with at the 
least a rudimentary understanding of place, people, and behavior-based strategies.
To capture potential responses to the challenges posed by community violence, a framework 
can look to the public health field, which generally organizes anti-violence efforts into primary, 
secondary, and tertiary prevention as shown in Figure 5 . Primary prevention addresses risk 
factors associated with violence in the general population. Secondary prevention focuses on 
sub-populations with risk factors for future violence either as victims or perpetrators. Tertiary 
prevention attempts to intervene with those already engaged in violent behavior.
This model has many advantages. First, it classifies efforts by risk level with the 
understanding that as risk levels increase, fewer individuals are implicated. Second, it emphasizes prevention, a crucial component of a collective anti-violence response that has 
been traditionally underappreciated and underutilized. Third, the model is familiar to most 
public health practitioners and many others in the field, making it accessible and easy to use.
The public health model also has a number of disadvantages. First and foremost, it ignores 
law enforcement, the traditional institution charged with responding to crime and violence. 
This alone renders the model incomplete. Law enforcement is an essential partner in any community violence prevention strategy, and violence prevention efforts will be inhibited 
if police and prosecutors view their role as purely reactive. Violence prevention should be 
viewed and defined broadly in order to include law enforcement efforts to stop violence 
before it begins. Secondly, the public health model has yet to provide a clear explanation 
to practitioners of how tertiary prevention operates in the context of violence prevention. Figure 5. Public health model, original version.
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    273
Under tertiary prevention, the model tends to conflate prevention and rehabilitation – two 
practices that are generally conducted separately in the field. Third, in practice the model 
has generally placed an exaggerated emphasis on primary prevention, an important but not 
necessarily dominant element of an evidence-informed, multi-sector response for prevent -
ing community violence.
For these reasons, the public health model should be modified when used in relation 
to community violence (Figure 6). First, suppression should be added to account for the role of law enforcement. Suppression prevents violence via deterrence and incapacitation, 
generally but not exclusively through threats of arrest and incarceration. Second, tertiary 
prevention and rehabilitation should be separated into discrete categories. While they both 
concern those engaged in violence, tertiary prevention focuses on those currently in residing 
the community, whereas rehabilitation generally assists former offenders reentering society 
after they have been adjudicated and/or imprisoned.
Having provided a conceptual framework for understanding both the problem of and 
solutions to community violence, we now combine our criminology-based theory of com-
munity violence with our modified public health model, mapping places, people, and behav -
iors against prevention (primary, secondary, and tertiary), suppression, and rehabilitation, 
creating a grid with a total of fifteen sections (Table 1). This framework is theoretically 
sound, reasonably complete, informed by the evidence, and implementable in practice.
As noted previously, different forms of violence require different strategies. This framework 
is carefully constructed in order to address community violence among youth, especially 
lethal violence. Addressing other forms of violence will require different strategies, partners, 
and frameworks. As discussed further below, an approach carefully constructed to address 
one form of violence cannot be casually transferred to other forms of violence, such as family 
violence or violence perpetrated by organized crime, without significant modification.Figure 6. Public health model, revised version.
Table 1. anti-community violence framework, empty.
  Primary 
preventionSecondary 
preventionTertiary 
prevention Suppression Rehabilitation
Places          
People          
Behaviors          
274   T. P . ABT
Understanding ‘what works’ in community violence prevention
An effective anti-community violence framework should be populated with strategies 
informed by the best and most rigorously generated evidence, data, and information avail-
able. In addition, selected programmatic strategies should be suitable for and tailored to the 
local context in which it will operate. Finally, in order to be effective, programming must be soundly implemented. In some analyses, well-implemented interventions outperform 
poorly implemented ones, even if the latter have stronger, more evidence-informed designs 
(Lipsey, 2009). Tension between these principles is unavoidable, and mitigating such ten-
sion is a complex matter of professional judgment. This section explores the first of these 
principles; the latter two are examined in the discussion.
Since its introduction in the late 1990s, the term ‘what works’ has been understood in 
criminology to mean programming that has been demonstrated to be effective according to 
causal evidence generated from well-designed quasi-experimental or preferably experimen -
tal evaluations (Sherman et al., 1997). As noted previously, this paper draws significantly 
from a recent report (Abt & Winship, 2016) that analyzed 43 separate systematic reviews and 
meta-analyses synthesizing such evidence concerning community violence. Conclusions 
from that report are summarized and elaborated upon below in order to provide initial 
guidance on how best to populate the proposed framework.
Place-based primary prevention
Urban renewal strategies are associated with reduced crime and violence as well as improve -
ments in police legitimacy and collective efficacy, but the number and quality of studies 
supporting these findings are limited (Cassidy et al., 2014). CPTED, or Crime Prevention 
Through Environmental Design, seeks to prevent crime through manipulation of the phys -
ical environment. Multiple reviews found only modest impacts on crime and especially violence for such strategies (Cassidy et al., 2014; Farrington & Welsh, 2002; Farrington 
et al., 2007; Welsh & Farrington, 2009). Neighborhood watch programs yielded similarly 
modest effects (Bennett et al., 2006).
In order to strengthen these programmatic strategies, particularly for urban renewal and 
CPTED, the focus of these efforts could be narrowed to the specific locations where most violence occurs, i.e. hot spots, in effect elevating them in focus from primary to secondary 
or tertiary prevention. Urban revitalization and environmental crime prevention efforts 
are worthwhile for a multitude of reasons, but if the intended purpose is violence preven-
tion specifically, their focus should be restricted to those micro-locations that generate the 
greatest amounts of such conduct.
People-based primary prevention
Researchers disagree as to the impacts of vocational training on criminal behavior, reflect-
ing a broader uncertainty in the field as to the effectiveness of stand-alone employment, 
vocational, and training programs (Aos et al., 2006 ; Visher, Winterfield, & Coggeshall, 2005 ) 
for violence reduction. Y outh mentoring receives a similarly mixed assessment (Fagan & 
Catalano, 2013; Jolliffe & Farrington, 2007). As with place-based primary prevention, such 
programs could improve performance with additional focus on youth at the greatest risk 
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    275
for violence. In addition, pairing such programming with proven strategies like cognitive 
behavioral therapy (CBT) (examined further below) could also enhance effectiveness.
More promising were school and especially family-based interventions, particularly when 
such efforts employed CBT. Early childhood programs such as the Perry Preschool pro-gram and the Nurse Family Partnership have especially strong and well-established effects 
(Fagan & Catalano, 2013). Making sure these programs serve the schools and families most 
impacted by violence will further strengthen anti-violence outcomes.
Behavior-based primary prevention
Juvenile curfews, gang prevention, and gun buyback strategies all demonstrated no impacts 
on crime or violence (Adams, 2003; Gravel, Bouchard, Morselli, & Descormiers, 2012; 
Makarios & Pratt, 2012).
Place-based secondary prevention
No systemic reviews examining place-based secondary prevention interventions were iden -
tified. An exploration of why systematic causal evidence is available for certain framework 
categories but not others would be worthwhile but is beyond the scope of this article.
People- and behavior-based secondary prevention
CBT uses clinical psychological techniques to alter the distorted thinking and behavior of 
criminal and juvenile offenders. A Campbell Collaboration review strongly reinforced, with 
58 studies, 19 of which were randomized controlled trials, what numerous others had pre-
viously found: CBT works (Lipsey, Landenberger, & Wilson, 2007). CBT has been effective 
in reducing recidivism among juvenile and adult offenders, in institutional or community 
settings, as part of a broader program or as a stand-alone intervention. Few interventions 
can match its reliability and versatility. CBT was associated with a relatively large 25% aver -
age decrease in recidivism, but when the most effective types of CBT were used, recidivism declined 52%. These most positive results were not an outlier – approximately 1 in 5 of the 
interventions studied produced such effects or better.
Several family-based secondary prevention programs, including the well known Family 
Functional Therapy, Multi-Systemic Therapy, and Multidimensional Treatment Foster Care 
interventions, have strong records of demonstrated of effectiveness in reducing aggressive 
behavior, delinquency, and contact with the criminal and juvenile justice systems (Fagan & 
Catalano, 2013). These programs often prominently feature CBT, among other techniques. 
It should be noted, however, that one systematic review has questioned the effectiveness of Multi-Systemic Therapy (Littell, Campbell, Green, & Toews, 2005).
While no systematic reviews have been conducted, numerous studies indicate that vio-
lence can be reduced substantially by regulating the availability and use of alcohol (WHO, 
2010), either by managing the hours, prices, and locations at which it is sold, providing 
treatment for alcohol abusers, or by improving the management of environments where 
it is served.
276   T. P . ABT
Place-based tertiary prevention
No systemic reviews examining place-based tertiary prevention interventions were 
identified.
People- and behavior-based tertiary prevention
A common prominent feature of strategies in this area is an intense focus on those at the 
highest risk for violence, paired with an equally intense focus on a narrow range of behavior, 
usually firearm-related shootings and homicides. Focused deterrence had the largest direct 
impact on crime and violence, by far, of any intervention examined in the meta-review. 
Focused deterrence involves the identification of specific offenders and offending groups, 
the mobilization of a diverse group of law enforcement, social services, and community 
stakeholders, the framing of a response using both sanctions and rewards, and direct, 
repeated communication with the individuals and groups in order to stop their violent 
behavior. In another Campbell Collaboration review, 9 of 10 focused deterrence interven-
tions substantially reduced crime and violence, with homicide reductions ranging from 
34% to 63% (Braga & Weisburd, 2012). Since publication of that review, additional studies 
have documented more examples of focused deterrence success (Corsaro & Engel, 2015).
The use of street, gang, or youth workers to quell violence has a mixed record of effec-
tiveness and the strategy’s results appear quite sensitive to implementation. No systematic 
review has been performed, but the best-known application of the strategy, CureViolence, 
has been evaluated numerous times, earning uneven results (Whitehill, Webster, & Vernick, 
2012; Wilson & Chermak, 2011) while drawing support from some quarters (Butts, Roman, 
Bostwick, & Porter, 2015) and criticism from others (Kennedy, 2011; Papachristos, 2011). ‘Street mediation’ strategies offer significant promise but also some risk. Further systema-
tizing and professionalizing the approach, clarifying streetworkers’ relationship to formal 
institutions such as law enforcement, and evaluating additional streetworker models (Los 
Angeles’ Urban Peace Institute and Providence’s Institute for the Study and Practice of 
Nonviolence are both noteworthy, longstanding efforts) could strengthen the understanding 
and performance of these efforts.
Place-based suppression
Hot spots policing, which focuses police attention on the small geographic areas where crime 
frequently concentrates, has consistently demonstrated modest to moderate impacts on 
crime and violence (Braga, Papachristos, & Hureau, 2014). Disorder policing, also known as 
broken windows policing, addresses physical and social disorder in neighborhoods in order 
to prevent crime and violence. While this strategy has moderate crime benefits, problem- 
and community-oriented applications demonstrated stronger results, without triggering 
community resistance, than aggressive ‘zero tolerance’ versions (Braga, Welsh, & Schnell, 
2015). Community policing leverages partnerships with residents and the community in 
order to reduce crime and disorder, but surprisingly has little discernable impact on crime 
and violence, although it did positively affect citizen satisfaction, perceptions of disorder, 
and police legitimacy (Gill, Weisburd, Telep, Vitter, & Bennett, 2014).
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    277
People-based suppression
Problem-oriented policing uses analysis to tailor law enforcement responses to specific 
public safety problems, yielding a modest to moderate reductions in crime and violence 
(Weisburd, Telep, Hinkle, & Eck, 2010). Interestingly, problem-oriented policing appears 
to improve the performance of other policing strategies, such as hot spots, disorder, and 
community-oriented policing, and may have greater impact in a supporting rather than 
leading role. It should be noted that problem-oriented strategies span the spectrum of place-, 
people-, and behavior-based approaches.
Behavior-based suppression
Targeted firearms enforcement has demonstrated moderate effects in reducing gun crime 
and violence (Koper & Mayo-Wilson, 2006; Makarios & Pratt, 2012). Conversely, aggres-
sive drug enforcement appears to have minimal impacts (Mazerolle, Soole, & Rombouts, 
2006) and may actually increase violence by destabilizing drug markets thereby increasing 
competition and violence among drug sellers (Werb et al., 2011).
Place-based rehabilitation
No systemic reviews examining place-based rehabilitation interventions were identified.
People-based rehabilitation
There is a substantial body of evidence demonstrating that well-designed, well-implemented 
recidivism reduction programs employing a risk/needs/responsivity framework are effec-
tive (Lipsey, 2009; Smith, Gendreau, & Swartz, 2009). The evidence is equally clear that 
surveillance, deterrence, and discipline strategies are ineffective at best in reducing recidi-
vism among youth (Petrosino, Turpin-Petrosino, Hollis-Peel, & Lavenberg, 2013; Wilson, 
MacKenzie, & Mitchell, 2005). While boots camps have no impact, Scared Straight programs 
actually cause harm in that they are associated with modest increases in juvenile recidi-vism. Restorative justice programs appear to have modest impacts on offender recidivism, 
when both the victim and offender affirmatively consent to participate in the intervention 
(Latimer, Dowden, & Muise, 2005; Sherman, Strang, Mayo-Wilson, Woods, & Ariel, 2015).
Behavior-based rehabilitation
Multiple systematic reviews indicate that drug treatment and drug courts can significantly 
and positively impact recidivism (Holloway, Bennett, & Farrington, 2006; Mitchell, Wilson, 
Eggers, & MacKenzie, 2012; Mitchell, Wilson, & MacKenzie, 2007).
Populating the framework with ‘what works’
A framework populated with the strategies described above is provided in Table 2. When 
interventions with minimal, mixed, null, or negative effects on community violence are 
removed from the framework as in Table 3, a clearer picture of ‘what works’ begins to 
278   T. P . ABT
emerge. Once the places, people, and behaviors responsible for generating most community 
violence in a given jurisdiction have been identified, this framework can provide a helpful 
roadmap for identifying, selecting, and coordinating programmatic responses.
For instance, with micro-locations where violence generally concentrates, place-based 
suppression strategies such as hot spots policing can make an immediate difference, while 
hot spot urban renewal and CPTED prevention strategies can improve transportation, 
housing, lighting, and vegetation in the immediate area so that reductions in violence are 
more likely to be sustained over time.
For those most likely to perpetrate or be victimized by violence in and around hot 
spots, focused deterrence initiatives supported by street or youth workers could send a Table 2. anti-community violence framework, populated.
note: i nterventions with modest, mixed, null, or negative effects on community violence are indicated in italics. 
Primary PreventionSecondary 
PreventionTertiary 
Prevention Suppression Rehabilitation
Place Urban renewal     hot spots policing  
disorder policingCPTED
Neighborhood watchProblem-oriented 
policing
Community 
policing
People Family-based therapy cBt Focused 
deterrenceProblem-oriented 
policingRecidivism 
reduction Family-based 
therapy Restorative justice Streetworker 
programsBoot camps 
school-based programs Scared straight
Vocational trainingMentoring
Behavior Family-based therapy cBt Focused 
deterrence Streetworker programsProblem-oriented 
policing drug courts and 
treatment Family-based 
therapy school-based programs Firearms 
enforcement alcohol regu-
lation Drug enforcementJuvenile curfews Gun buybacks Gang prevention
Table 3. anti-community violence framework, populated with ‘what works’ only.
note: i nterventions that, if revised, could have significantly improved effects are indicated in parentheses.  Primary 
PreventionSecondary 
Prevention Tertiary Prevention Suppression Rehabilitation
Place     (Urban renewal) ( cPted )hot spots 
policing  
disorder policing Problem-oriented 
policing
People Family-based 
therapy cBt Focused deterrence Problem-oriented 
policingRecidivism 
reduction Family-based 
therapy(streetworker programs)school-based 
programs
Behavior Family-based 
therapy cBt Focused deterrence 
(streetworker 
programs)Firearms 
enforcement drug courts and 
treatment Family-based 
therapy 
alcohol 
regulationschool-based 
programsProblem-oriented 
policing
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    279
clear message that violence will not be tolerated. CBT can train young men to control their 
anger and solve their disputes peaceably. Weak programming can be strengthened rather 
than eliminated by incorporating CBT elements. Family-based therapy can assist parents 
in keeping their children on the right path.
For the most dangerous behaviors, targeted police patrols can engage repeat offenders and 
take guns off the street. Regulations on alcohol can change when, where, and how liquor is sold, making it harder for violent people in hot-spot areas to drink to excess. Finally, as to 
gangs, focused deterrence and streetworker programs have proven capable of influencing 
gang behavior.
Making the case for accumulation, concentration, and coordination
Examining anti-violence efforts across all categories, it becomes clear that only a few demon -
strate clear and substantial positive effects on crime and violence, and even the most power -
ful interventions are incapable of reversing high rates of community violence by themselves. 
Given this, success requires the accumulation of individually modest but collectively robust 
programmatic effects. Risk and protective factors for violence are cumulative by nature (Office of the U.S. Surgeon General, 2001), so a strategy that builds impact over multiple 
programs makes similarly good sense.
As noted previously, crime and violence generally concentrate in and around a small 
number high-risk places, people, and behaviors. It follows that programmatic interventions 
targeting these concentrations are more likely to be effective than those that do not. Across 
the spectrum of anti-violence programming, it is well established that interventions focusing 
on the highest risk places, people, and behaviors generate the strongest effects. This is true of interventions relating to policing (Braga, 2015), gang reduction (Gravel et al., 2012), youth 
firearm violence reduction (Petrosino et al., 2015), youth violence prevention (Matjasko  
et al., 2012); and adult and juvenile recidivism reduction (Hollin, 1999; Lipsey & Cullen, 2007).
Similarly, in public health terminology, interventions targeting indicated and selected 
populations tend to outperform those addressing universal ones. In a systematic review of 41 youth violence interventions, researchers found that effectiveness increased as the 
interventions moved from primary through secondary to tertiary prevention (Limbos et al., 
2007). Of the 15 studies that were randomized controlled trials, two of six (33%) primary, 
three of seven (43%) of secondary, and both (100%) of the tertiary prevention interventions 
were effective in reducing violent behavior among youth.
Accumulating and concentrating effects will fail if crime simply ‘moves around the cor -
ner’ . Fortunately, a robust body of rigorous evidence clearly establishes that when crime and 
violence are targeted, displacement to surrounding areas is minimal.
[O]ver 30 years of research evidence on this topic … suggests that crime relocates in only a 
minority of instances. More commonly, it has been found that the opposite, a diffusion of crime 
reduction benefits in nearby areas not targeted by interventions, occurs at a rate that is about 
equal to observations of displacement. (Johnson et al., 2014)
A corollary to the case for concentration is the need for coordination among selected pro-
grams. Unfortunately, there is little practical guidance for policymakers on how to identify 
the right mix of interventions and how to coordinate them effectively (Abt, 2014). For 
instance, the case for ‘comprehensive’ approaches to community violence prevention is 
280   T. P . ABT
decidedly mixed. Some reviews have found comprehensive or holistic approaches to be 
ineffective due to the inherent implementation challenges associated with getting numerous 
participants and organizations ‘on the same page’ (Gravel et al., 2012; Matjasko et al., 2012). 
Others claim such approaches work because they capitalize on the strength and diversity of 
multiple stakeholders (Makarios & Pratt, 2012; Petrosino et al., 2015). Complete compre-
hensiveness, while laudable in theory, is unlikely to be achievable in practice. The best case 
for multi-disciplinary collaboration recognizes that the capacity to coordinate is a finite 
resource like any other, and one to be used judiciously.
In order to achieve significant reductions in community violence, resources should be 
amassed and aligned where they will be most effective. Accumulating, concentrating, and 
coordinating efforts is intuitive, backed by strong evidence, and perhaps most importantly, economically and administratively feasible. Public and private institutions responding to 
violence lack the capacity to act everywhere, but they can collaborate where it matters most.
Discussion
The conceptual framework proposed here has several advantages over previous models. 
First, community violence – the challenge to be addressed – is contextualized in relation 
to other forms of violence. Second, the framework integrates theories and models from 
criminal justice and public health, the two most dominant fields in violence prevention. 
In doing so, the framework accounts for both the problem of community violence as well 
as potential policy solutions – an advancement over models that describe only one or the 
other. Third, the framework is informed by the most rigorous evidence currently available, 
in that the model reflects the concentrated nature of the phenomenon and synthesizes 
programmatic evidence of effectiveness. Fourth, by consolidating and adapting previous 
well-recognized theories and models, the framework is relatively readily understood and 
applied. In short, the proposed framework satisfies the previously-stated criteria of com-
pleteness, accuracy, and usability.
This conceptual framework also has a number of limitations. First, the proffered violence 
continuum is admittedly and necessarily imperfect. This can and should be improved upon 
as scholars and practitioners focused on other forms of violence contribute their insights and expertise.
Second, the framework itself is intended for community violence only. Violence in 
homes and schools operates differently than in the community, as does organized violence 
between gangs, criminal organizations, or states. For example, while the evidence is clear 
with regard to the limited displacement of community violence, the same cannot be said for 
sophisticated criminal organizations such as transnational drug cartels, which have repeat -
edly demonstrated the capacity to relocate or otherwise respond to targeted interventions. 
Relatedly, the framework does not speak to crime generally, but instead focuses squarely on 
violence, particularly lethal violence. Finally, the framework primarily addresses youth, but 
with adaptation the framework could have value in addressing community violence more 
generally, as its concentrated nature tends not vary with age.
Third, while the populated framework represents a summary of the best evidence cur -
rently available concerning anti-community violence programming, the limits of this evi-
dence and of evidence-informed policy generally must be kept in mind. Within the field 
of community violence prevention, significant evidentiary gaps remain, and the scientific 
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    281
process is an iterative one, meaning that our understanding of community violence and 
how best to prevent it must be continually updated and refined. In addition, the evidence 
relied upon here was drawn overwhelmingly from high-income settings, raising important 
questions concerning its generalizability or external validity. While emerging evidence indicates that while crime and violence appears to concentrate similarly across contexts 
(Jaitman & Ajzenman, 2016), low and middle-income nations often face capacity challenges 
when attempting to implement evidence-informed programming.
Fourth, the framework speaks primarily to the identification, selection, and organization 
of evidence-informed programs, but understanding the evidence is only one of several components of success in reducing violence. Programs must be carefully selected, adapted, 
and implemented according to local circumstances. Doing this effectively requires a sound understanding of the local context along with an intervention’s essential elements of effec-
tiveness. If the context allows for adoption of the essential elements, implementation can 
proceed with nonessential components altered as necessary. If the context requires compro -
mising of one or more essential elements, a more contextually appropriate choice should be selected. Additionally, the programmatic focus of the framework offers little in terms 
of institutional strengthening, which is another important component of any long-term 
anti-violence strategy.
Fifth, the framework does not address program implementation, a critical component 
of intervention success (Hollin, 1999; Lipsey & Cullen, 2007). When implementing, care-
ful attention should be paid to the quantity, intensity, and/or dosage of a given treatment. 
The U.S. National Research Council (2013) has concluded that with regard to youth at risk 
for violence and criminality, ‘Whatever the specific mechanism, the appropriate focusing 
of more intense (and costly) interventions on higher risk adolescents produces a greater 
reduction in subsequent offending and limits the negative effects of unwarranted intensive 
intervention on less serious offenders’ . This finding reinforces the previously made case for 
the accumulation and concentration of programmatic effects.
With these advantages and disadvantages in mind, how might be the theoretical frame-
work advanced in this article be adopted? First, every effort – whether at the local, state, or 
national level – should begin with analysis, the goal of which is to identify the places, people, 
and behavior among which violence concentrates. Next, a common understanding of the 
concentrated nature of violence must be built by transparently sharing this information with 
civic, community, and criminal justice stakeholders. Procedural justice principles (Tyler, 
2006), increasingly used in the United States and elsewhere to improve the legitimacy of 
criminal justice institutions, can offer helpful guidance in this area.
Once a common understanding of the problem has been achieved, the effort may turn 
to solutions. Using the framework, stakeholders would identify a balanced set of contextu-
ally appropriate programmatic interventions, including both suppression and some form 
of prevention (preferably secondary or tertiary), in each of the categories of place, people, 
and behaviors. Especially initially, care must be taken to avoid ‘policy sprawl’ , e.g. includ-
ing extraneous partners who contribute little but drain coordination capacity. Ideally, the 
selected interventions will bring together a small set of like-minded multi-disciplinary 
partners who can focus exclusively on preventing community violence where it concentrates 
most. In terms of measuring performance, it makes sense to begin with homicide, as it is the most costly, comparable, and reliably measured form of violence.
282   T. P . ABT
Once selected, the implementation of interventions must maintain fidelity to the essential 
elements of effectiveness while adapting said interventions to the local context. Care must 
be taken to ensure the delivery of high-dosage treatments to high-risk places and people. 
Efforts should be monitored and evaluated on an ongoing basis, using the best data and 
most rigorous methodologies available under the circumstances.
Finally, an ongoing effort should be conducted to coordinate with other anti-violence 
efforts represented along the violence continuum. Regions plagued by high rates of vio-
lence generally suffer from numerous forms of violence, necessitating a set of separate but 
loosely connected strategies. While emphases may vary, given the diversity of and contagion 
between different forms of violence, policymakers cannot afford to focus on only one type 
of violence to the exclusion of all others. Community violence prevention practitioners 
should therefore meet semi-regularly with their colleagues working to prevent other forms of violence, maintaining situational awareness and seizing opportunities to collaborate 
when possible. For instance, in El Salvador, efforts to prevent community violence should 
be aligned with efforts to limit the violence perpetrated by gangs, cartels, and other criminal 
organizations. Similarly, community violence practitioners should be aware of the linkages between early exposure to family and intimate partner violence and violence perpetrated 
later in life.
Conclusion
Community violence among youth  is a complex and persistent social phenomenon. 
Responding to such a challenge requires a sophisticated and nuanced understanding of the 
problem as well as the collective capacity for solutions. Such an understanding is necessarily 
imperfect and constantly evolving, but can nevertheless be advanced via the development and adoption of theoretically sound, evidence-informed, and practically implementable 
frameworks such as the one proposed in this article.
Disclosure statement
No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author.
Funding
This work was supported by Know Violence in Childhood.
ORCID
Thomas P . Abt   http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0785-9304
References
Abt, T. (2014). Integrating evidence to stop shootings: New Y ork’s GIVE (Gun-Involved Violence 
Elimination) initiative. Translational Criminology , 7, 11–13.
Abt, T. P ., & Winship, C. (2016). “What works” in reducing community violence: A meta-review and 
field study for the northern triangle. Washington, DC: United States Agency for International 
Development.
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    283
Adams, K. (2003). The effectiveness of juvenile curfews at crime prevention. The Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science, 587, 136–159.
Aos, S., Miller, M. G., & Drake, E. (2006). Evidence-based adult corrections programs: What works 
and what does not . Olympia, W A: Washington State Institute for Public Policy.
Bennett, T., Holloway, K., & Farrington, D. P . (2006). Does neighborhood watch reduce crime? A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 2, 437–458.
Braga, A. (2015). Crime and policing, revisited . New perspectives in policing bulletin. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Justice, National Institute of Justice.
Braga, A. A., Papachristos, A. V ., & Hureau, D. M. (2014). The effects of hot spots policing on crime: 
An updated systematic review and meta-analysis. Justice Quarterly , 31, 633–663.
Braga, A., & Weisburd, D. (2012). The effects of “pulling levers” focused deterrence strategies on 
crime. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 2012, 6.
Braga, A. A., Welsh, B. C., & Schnell, C. (2015). Can policing disorder reduce crime? A systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 52, 567–588.
Braga, A., & Winship, C. (2015). StreetSafe Boston . Retrieved September 13, 2016, from https://www.
hks.harvard.edu/programs/criminaljustice/research-publications/gangs-guns-urban-violence/
streetsafe-boston
Butts, J. A., Roman, C. G., Bostwick, L., & Porter, J. (2015). Cure violence: A public health model to 
reduce gun violence. Annual Review of Public Health, 36, 39–53.
Cassidy, T., Inglis, G., Wiysonge, C., & Matzopoulos, R. (2014). A systematic review of the effects 
of poverty deconcentration and urban upgrading on youth violence. Health & place , 26, 78–87.
Carroll, L., Perez, M. M., & Taylor, R. M. (2014). The evidence for violence prevention across the lifespan 
and around the world . Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Cohen, L. E., & Felson, M. (1979). Social change and crime rate trends: A routine activity approach. 
American Sociological Review , 4, 588–608.
Cornish, D. B., & Clarke, R. V . (2008). The rational choice perspective. In R. Wortley & L. Mazerolle 
(Eds.), Environmental criminology and crime analysis (pp. 21–47). London: Routledge.
Corsaro, N., & Engel, R. S. (2015). Most challenging of contexts. Criminology & Public Policy , 14, 
471–505.
Decker, S. H. (1996). Collective and normative features of gang violence. Justice Quarterly , 13, 243–264.
Development Bank of Latin America (CAF). (2014). Towards a safer Latin America: A new perspective 
to prevent and control crime. Andean Development Corporation.
Fagan, A. A., & Catalano, R. F. (2013). What works in youth violence prevention: a review of the 
literature. Research on social work practice, 23, 141–156.
Farrington, D. P ., Gill, M., Waples, S. J., & Argomaniz, J. (2007). The effects of closed-circuit television 
on crime: Meta-analysis of an English national quasi-experimental multi-site evaluation. Journal 
of Experimental Criminology, 3, 21–38.
Farrington, D. P ., & Welsh, B. C. (2002). Effects of improved street lighting on crime: a systematic review. 
London, England: Home Office.
Gill, C., Weisburd, D., Telep, C. W ., Vitter, Z., & Bennett, T. (2014). Community-oriented policing 
to reduce crime, disorder and fear and increase satisfaction and legitimacy among citizens: A systematic review. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 10, 399–428.
Gravel, J., Bouchard, M., Morselli, C., & Descormiers, K. (2012). Effectiveness of street gang control 
strategies: A systematic review and meta-analysis of evaluation studies Public Safety Canada.
Hollin, C. R. (1999). Treatment programs for offenders: Meta-analysis, “what works” , and beyond. 
International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, 22, 361–372.
Holloway, K. R., Bennett, T. H., & Farrington, D. P . (2006). The effectiveness of drug treatment 
programs in reducing criminal behavior: A meta-analysis. Psicothema , 18, 620–629.
Jaitman, L., & Ajzenman, N. (2016). Crime concentration and hot spot dynamics in Latin America 
(No. IDB-WP-699). Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
Johnson, S. D., Guerette, R. T., & Bowers, K. (2014). Crime displacement: What we know, what we 
don’t know, and what it means for crime reduction. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 10, 
549–571.
284   T. P . ABT
Jolliffe, D., & Farrington, D. P . (2007). A rapid evidence assessment of the impact of mentoring on re-
offending: A summary . London: Home Office.
Kennedy, D. M. (2011). Whither streetwork? Criminology & Public Policy , 10, 1045–1051.
Killias, M., & Villetaz, P . (2008). The effects of custodial vs. non-custodial sanctions on reoffending: 
Lessons from a systematic review. Psicothema , 20, 29–34.
Koper, C. S., & Mayo-Wilson, E. (2006). Police crackdowns on illegal gun carrying: a systematic 
review of their impact on gun crime. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 2, 227–261.
Krug, E. G., Mercy, J. A., Dahlberg, L. L., & Zwi, A. B. (2002). The world report on violence and 
health. The Lancet , 360, 1083–1088.
Latimer, J., Dowden, C., & Muise, D. ( 2005 ). The effectiveness of restorative justice practices: A meta-
analysis. The Prison Journal , 85, 127–144.
Limbos, M. A., Chan, L. S., Warf, C., Schneir, A., Iverson, E., Shekelle, P ., & Kipke, M. D. (2007). 
Effectiveness of interventions to prevent youth violence: A systematic review. American Journal 
of Preventive Medicine, 33, 65–74.
Lipsey, M. W . (2009). The primary factors that characterize effective interventions with juvenile 
offenders: A meta-analytic overview. Victims & Offenders, 4, 124–147.
Lipsey, M. W ., & Cullen, F. T. (2007). The effectiveness of correctional rehabilitation: A review of 
systematic reviews. Annual Review of Law and Social Science, 3, 297–320.
Lipsey, M., Landenberger, N. A., & Wilson, S. J. (2007). Effects of cognitive-behavioral programs for 
criminal offenders: A systematic review. Campbell systematic reviews, 3(6).
Littell, J. H., Campbell, M., Green, S., & Toews, B. (2005). Multisystemic Therapy for social, emotional, 
and behavioral problems in youth aged 10–17. The Cochrane Library.
Makarios, M. D., & Pratt, T. C. (2012). The effectiveness of policies and programs that attempt to 
reduce firearm violence: A meta-analysis. Crime & Delinquency , 58, 222–244.
Matjasko, J. L., Vivolo-Kantor, A. M., Massetti, G. M., Holland, K. M., Holt, M. K., & Cruz, J. D. (2012). 
A systematic meta-review of evaluations of youth violence prevention programs: Common and 
divergent findings from 25 years of meta-analyses and systematic reviews. Aggression and Violent 
Behavior , 17, 540–552.
Mazerolle, L., Soole, D. W ., & Rombouts, S. (2006). Street-level drug law enforcement: A meta-
analytical review. Journal of experimental criminology, 2, 409–435.
Mitchell, O., Wilson, D. B., Eggers, A., & MacKenzie, D. L. (2012). Assessing the effectiveness of 
drug courts on recidivism: A meta-analytic review of traditional and non-traditional drug courts. Journal of Criminal Justice , 40, 60–71.
Mitchell, O., Wilson, D. B., & MacKenzie, D. L. (2007). Does incarceration-based drug treatment 
reduce recidivism? A meta-analytic synthesis of the research. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 
3, 353–375.
Muggah, R. (2015, January 15). Fixing fragile cities: Solutions for urban violence and poverty. Foreign 
Affairs , January 15, 2015.
National Research Council. (2013). Reforming juvenile justice: A developmental approach. Washington, 
DC: The National Academies Press.
Office of the U.S. Surgeon General. (2001). Youth violence: A report of the surgeon general. Rockville, 
MD: Office of the U.S. Surgeon General.
Papachristos, A. V . (2011). Too big to fail. Criminology & Public Policy , 10, 1053–1061.
Petrosino, A., Campie, P ., Pace, J., Fronius, T., Guckenburg, S., Wiatrowski, M., & Rivera, L. (2015). 
Cross-sector, multi-agency interventions to address urban youth firearms violence: A rapid 
evidence assessment. Aggression and Violent Behavior , 22, 87–96.
Petrosino, A., Turpin-Petrosino, C., Hollis-Peel, M., & Lavenberg, J. G. (2013). Scared straight and 
other juvenile awareness programs for preventing juvenile delinquency: A systematic review. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 2013, 5.
Robinson, L., & Abt, T. (2016). Opportunities and obstacles for evidence-informed criminal justice 
policy. In T. Blomberg, J. M. Brancale, K. Beaver, & W . Bales (Eds.), Advancing criminology and 
criminal justice policy  (pp. 11–25). London: Routledge.
Sherman, L. W . (2012). Developing and evaluating citizen security programs in Latin America. 
Washington, DC: Inter-American Development Bank.
PSYCHOLOGY, HEALTH & MEDICINE    285
Sherman, L. W ., Gottfredson, D., MacKenzie, D., Eck, J., Reuter, P ., & Bushway, S. (1997). Preventing 
crime: What works, what doesn’t, what’s promising: A report to the United States Congress. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs.
Sherman, L. W ., Strang, H., Mayo-Wilson, E., Woods, D. J., & Ariel, B. (2015). Are restorative justice 
conferences effective in reducing repeat offending? Findings from a campbell systematic review. 
Journal of Quantitative Criminology, 31(1), 1–24.
Smith, P ., Gendreau, P ., & Swartz, K. (2009). Validating the principles of effective intervention: A 
systematic review of the contributions of meta-analysis in the field of corrections. Victims and 
Offenders , 4, 148–169.
Tyler, T. R. (2006). Why people obey the law . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
UNICEF. (2014). Hidden in plain sight. A statistical analysis of violence against children. New Y ork, 
NY: United Nations.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime. (2013). Global study on homicide 2013. Vienna, Austria: 
United Nations.
Visher, C. A., Winterfield, L., & Coggeshall, M. B. (2005). Ex-offender employment programs and 
recidivism: A meta-analysis. Journal of Experimental Criminology, 1, 295–316.
Weisburd, D., Telep, C. W ., Hinkle, J. C., & Eck, J. E. (2010). Is problem-oriented policing effective 
in reducing crime and disorder? Criminology & Public Policy , 9, 139–172.
Welsh, B. C., & Farrington, D. P . (2009). Public Area CCTV and Crime Prevention: An Updated 
Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Justice Quarterly , 26, 716–745.
Werb, D., Rowell, G., Guyatt, G., Kerr, T., Montaner, J., & Wood, E. (2011). Effect of drug law 
enforcement on drug market violence: A systematic review. International Journal of Drug Policy , 
22, 87–94.
Whitehill, J. M., Webster, D. W ., & Vernick, J. S. (2012). Street conflict mediation to prevent youth 
violence: Conflict characteristics and outcomes. Injury prevention .
Wilson, J. M., & Chermak, S. (2011). Community-driven violence reduction programs. Criminology 
& Public Policy , 10, 993–1027.
Wilson, D. B., MacKenzie, D. L., & Mitchell, F. N. (2005). Effects of correctional boot camps on 
offending. Campbell Systematic Reviews, 2005, 6.
World Health Organization. (2010). Violence prevention: The evidence. Geneva, Switzerland: World 
Health Organization.
