SHORT REPORT Open Access
Development of a checklist to assess the quality of
reporting of knowledge translation interventions
using the Workgroup for Intervention
Development and Evaluation Research (WIDER)
recommendations
Lauren Albrecht, Mandy Archibald, Danielle Arseneau and Shannon D Scott*
Abstract
Background: Influenced by an important paper by Michie et al. , outlining the rationale and requirements for
detailed reporting of behavior change interventions now required by Implementation Science, we created and
refined a checklist to operationalize the Workgroup for Intervention Development and Evaluation Research (WIDER)
recommendations in systematic reviews. The WIDER recommendations provide a framework to identify and provide
detailed reporting of the essential components of behavior change interventions in order to facilitate replication,
further development, and scale-up of the interventions.
Findings: The checklist was developed, applied, and improved over the course of four systematic reviews of
knowledge translation (KT) strategies in a variety of healthcare settings conducted by Scott and associates. The
checklist was created as one method of operationalizing the work of the WIDER in order to facilitate comparison
across heterogeneous studies included in these systematic reviews. Numerous challenges were encountered in the
process of creating and applying the checklist across four stages of development. The resulting improvements have
produced a ‘user-friendly ’and replicable checklist to assess the quality of reporting of KT interventions in systematic
reviews using the WIDER recommendations.
Conclusions: With journals, such as Implementation Science, using the WIDER recommendations as publication
requirements for evaluation reports of behavior change intervention studies, it is crucial to find methods of
examining, measuring, and reporting the quality of reporting. This checklist is one approach to operationalize the
WIDER recommendations in systematic review methodology.
Keywords: Behavior change intervention reporting, Knowledge translation interventions, Reporting checklist,
Quality assessment, Systematic review
Findings
Current state of behavior change intervention studies
Behavior change interventions (BCIs) can be effective
ways to improve health outcomes and cut health spending
[1]. While expertise in the field of designing, evaluating,
and implementing BCIs exists, a few key barriers hamper
successful large-scale applica tion of BCIs. Recent researchsuggests that interventions are only described in detail 5%
to 30% of the time [2-5]. The result is that readers know
few details about the components of interventions and
the relationship between these components, which are
responsible for observed changes or outcomes. It is well
established that understanding the details of interventions
and the relationships between intervention components is
key to replicating BCIs, as well as further development and
scale-up [6]. This article describes one solution to identify
gaps in the reporting of intervention evaluation studies.* Correspondence: shannon.scott@ualberta.ca
University of Alberta, Level 3, Edmonton Clinic Health Academy, Edmonton,
AB, CanadaImplementation
Science
© 2013 Albrecht et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Albrecht et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:52
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/52
Calls for standardized reporting of behavior change
interventions
In 2001 the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials
(CONSORT) group developed evidence-based recommen-
dations to standardize reporting of randomized controlled
trials (RCTs) [7]. With an emphasis on transparency, a25-item checklist and flow diagram offered researchers
a scientific method to prepare reports of RCT findings.
In 2003, Davidson et al. [8] augmented the CONSORT
Statement to address unique features of conducting
behavioral medicine interventions in RCT studies. Further
developments took place in 2008, with a publicationauthored by Abraham and Michie [9] that called for
standardized language to describe BCIs, published stan-
dardized intervention protocols or manuals, and identifi-cation and description of links between behavior change
techniques and theoretical frameworks of potential change
mechanisms. Without these scientific advancements theability of BCI evaluations to contribute to evidence-based
practice is limited.
Emergence of the WIDER recommendations
In 2007, following the 21stannual conference of the
European Health Psychology Society, the WIDER issued
a consensus statement (Additional file 1). This statement
synthesized earlier calls for standardized reporting ofBCIs [8,9] and outlined a four-pronged method for BCI
reporting to be used in tandem with the CONSORT
statement [10]. The philosophy behind this publicationwas that greater clarity reg arding the functional com-
ponents of behavior change interventions is essential
to ensure that interventions are delivered to influenceoutcomes. The WIDER recommendations (Table 1) are
now an established framework to identify and describe
the essential components for detailed reporting ofBCIs. BCI publications are now required to apply the
WIDER recommendation in their work in order to
publish BCI studies in journals such as ImplementationScience [6] and Addiction [11].
Employing the WIDER recommendations in our work
Given the current state of the science related to evaluatingBCIs and the increasing importance of synthesizingliterature in this field from a variety of research designs
(i.e., RCTs, observational studies , qualitative research, etc.),
the purpose of this paper is to present one approach
for systematically operationalizing the WIDER recom-
mendations in systematic review methodology. Thisarticle describes the iterative process of creating, using,
and improving a WIDER Recommendation Checklist
and offers recommendations for its future developmentand use in systematic reviews.Conducting four systematic reviews: the impetus for the
WIDER recommendations checklist
Since 2010, we (Scott and associates) have conducted
four systematic reviews investi gating knowledge translation
(KT) interventions in a variety of healthcare professions
and settings. KT interventions can be likened to BCIs;however, they are broader in scope and include profes-
sional, financial, organizational, and structural inter-
ventions [12]. The first systematic review investigatedthe use of KT interventions in the allied health professions
(i.e., dietetics, occupational therapy, pharmacy, physio-
therapy, speech-language pathology) and was recentlypublished in Implementation Science [13]. A second
systematic review, currently in progress, focuses on KT
interventions employed within the rehabilitation medicine
professions ( i.e., a subset from the first systematic review).
The third systematic review, also currently in progress,
investigates the use of KT interventions to promoteresearch uptake with pediat ric healthcare professionals
in child health settings. The fourth systematic review,
currently in the data extractio n phase, investigates the use
of narrative and arts-based KT strategies in healthcare.
These three systematic reviews have not yet been published.
Rationale and development of the WIDER
recommendations checklist
In order to be responsive to the needs of decision
makers, the complexity of the clinical practice landscape,
and the diversity of the KT literature, our systematic
reviews are guided by an assumption of methodologicalinclusivity. Thus, a variety of study designs were included
in order to capture, report, and synthesize diverse forms
of evidence. Due to the broad scope of our systematicreviews, it was a challenge to compare KT interventions
across a wide range of study designs, settings, and pro-
fessions. The variety of interventions employed to effectdiverse behavior changes and the various ways in which
these changes were measured added further complexity to
data synthesis. In order to facilitate comparison acrossheterogeneous studies included in each of the systematic
reviews, we used the WIDER recommendations to examine
the quality of the reporting of KT interventions in order tobetter understand and compare the types of interventions
being implemented.
Phase one of checklist development: using the WIDER
recommendations to compare heterogeneous KT
intervention evaluation studies
In our first attempt at applying the WIDER recommenda-
tions within the context of a systematic review, we used a
general checklist in which the four WIDER recommenda-tions were broadly applied to each KT intervention study
(Additional file 2). In this ear ly conceptualization of the
checklist, all supplementary recommendations must haveAlbrecht et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:52 Page 2 of 5
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/52
been described to satisfy each WIDER recommendation.
While this was a novel approach for comparing diverse
interventions based on the quality of KT interventionreporting, this method largely resulted in the four WIDER
recommendations being classified as ‘not met ’across the
studies. Additionally, by co llapsing these supplementary
recommendations into the four broad WIDER recommen-
dations, we were unable to identify specific areas of defi-
cient reporting within each the WIDER recommendations.
Phase two of checklist development: refining the
checklist by illustrating a gradient
In the second iteration of the checklist, we sought to
measure the degree to which studies satisfied each of the
WIDER recommendations in order to account for theaforementioned conceptual difficulties (Additional file 3).
Each WIDER recommendation was segmented into the
supplementary recommendations, which allowed forpartial fulfillment of each recommendation. By reporting a
gradient within each WIDER recommendation, we identi-
fied areas that were well reported as well as areas that werepoorly reported across studies. This, allowed us to make
recommendations to improve future reporting of KT
intervention evaluation studies.
Working with the second version of the checklist was
an iterative process involvi ng frequent revisiting of
previously extracted articles and working dialogue withteam members. Developing a clear visual depiction of the
second iteration of our WIDER recommendations Check-
list, ( i.e.including supplementary recommendations), was
challenging as we sought to bal ance visual accessibility with
comprehensiveness of reporting. We discussed various
options for depicting the supplementary recommendations,such as a table format and a ‘thermometer ’representation.
Ultimately, a Microsoft Excel spreadsheet with colored
fonts and color ‘blocks ’was used to facilitate visual appeal
of the checklist, while at the same time clearly depicting the
degree to which each of the WIDER recommendations
were met in each study.
The second version of the WIDER Recommendation
Checklist required diligent and deliberate recognition of
many components related to the intervention ( e.g., time
of delivery, developmental basis for intervention) that
c o u l de a s i l yh a v eg o n eu n n o t i c e di nt h ep r e v i o u si t e r a t i o nof the checklist. It also provided insight into authors ’
assumptions regarding interventions. For example, a lack
of reporting in specific supplementary recommendationssuggests that authors do not recognize these as important,
or did not anticipate that deficient reporting in this area
could influence the interpretation of study results. Forexample, demographic characteristics of intervention and
control group participants were frequently not separated.
Grouping this information together made it impossibleto infer if differences between the intervention andTable 1 WIDER recommendations to improve reporting of the content of behavior change interventions
WIDER recommendations Supplementary recommendations
Detailed description of interventions in published papers 1) Characteristics of those delivering the intervention
2) Characteristics of the recipients3) The setting4) The mode of delivery5) The intensity6) The duration7) Adherence/fidelity to delivery protocols8) Detailed description of the intervention content provided for each study group
Clarification of assumed change process and design principles 1) The intervention development
2) The change techniques used in the intervention3) The causal processes targeted by these change techniques
Access to intervention manuals/protocols, Submit protocols or manuals for publication to make these supplementary
materials easily accessible ( i.e., online).
Detailed description of active control conditions 1) Characteristics of those delivering the control
2) Characteristics of the recipients3) The setting4) The mode of delivery5) The intensity6) The duration7) Adherence/fidelity to delivery protocols8) Detailed description of the control content providedAlbrecht et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:52 Page 3 of 5
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/52
control groups influenced outco mes. Additionally, deficient
reporting for specific supplementary recommendations
may point to confusion regarding the recipient of theintervention and the level or focus of the behavior change.
For example, interventions delivered to the healthcare
professional, but measured in terms of patient outcomeswere difficult to evaluate.
The main challenge in applying the WIDER Recom-
mendations Checklist stemmed from the lack of cleardefinitions regarding each of the four recommendations
and their supplementary recommendations. These prob-
lems persisted despite frequent team discussions and it wasdifficult to ‘draw the line ’between a category being satisfied
or not satisfied. Additionall y, while partial fulfillment
of a category was an improvement, it was difficult tovisually portray the specific supplementary recommen-
dations that were consistently described or not described
across the studies.
Phase three of checklist development: capturing the
nuances of the WIDER recommendations
The third version of the WIDER Recommendations
Checklist was developed to more accurately capture the
specific supplementary recommendations within each ofthe WIDER recommendations that were consistently sat-
isfied (or not satisfied) through the addition of a legend
to the Microsoft Excel table (Additional file 4). Thishelped us to represent the nuances of each of the four
WIDER recommendations and to clearly depict patterns
of reporting. Developing this version of the checklist wasa dynamic and iterative process, involving frequent team
discussions and revisiting previously extracted articles.
Our primary goal was to build on the strengths of ourprevious versions of the checklist and to address some
of the limitations by creating a user-friendly version with
visual impact. We believe that this strengthened ourmost recent systematic review by allowing us to compare
each WIDER recommendation and the supplementary
recommendation consistently and on an individual basisacross the studies. Additionally, the format of this ver-
sion of the checklist makes it easily replicable in other
systematic reviews.
Phase four of checklist development: developing a
glossary and conducting reliability testing
We are currently developing a fourth version of the
WIDER Recommendations Checklist to be used in our
fourth systematic review. In this version, we are developinga glossary containing clear definitions and examples to
guide decision making when using the checklist. We see
this as essential to defining the scope of each WIDER rec-ommendation and providing clear guidelines to determine
whether a study has met each recommendation and the
supplementary recommendatio ns. The glossary will be usedalongside the checklist and we will conduct reliability
testing of the checklist to ensure that this quality as-
sessment tool can be applied by other researchersconducting systematic reviews or KT intervention evalu-
ation studies.
Future development of the WIDER Recommendations
checklist
While we support the usability of our WIDER Recommen-
dations Checklist, we also acknowledge that improvements
can be made. First, the checklist could be studied for
validity. Second, we believe that determining a method of‘weighing ’each of the WIDER recommendations and the
supplementary recommendations would be an additional
benefit to the development of this checklist. As it stands,it is unclear which of the four WIDER recommendations
is the most important for the reporting of behavior
change interventions. For example, proponents of theory-informed interventions might argue that category two
(i.e., intervention development, change techniques
used, casual processes targeted) is the most importantto report; without a detailed understanding of the
change processes targeted and a comprehensive outline
of the intervention devel opment, replication of the
i n t e r v e n t i o nm a yb eu n l i k e l y ,t h e ‘active ingredients ’of
the intervention may be difficult to identify, and the
theory underlying the intervention subsequently can-n o tb et e s t e d .T h eW I D E Rr e c o m m e n d a t i o n sa n dt h e
supplementary recommendations should be weighted
to reflect the degree of importance, which has not beenrigorously reflected upon or studied.
Conclusions
Ultimately, the guiding philosophy behind the WIDER
Recommendations Checklist was the mantra: ‘Is this rep-
licable? ’Through the application of the checklist in four
systematic reviews, we found a high degree of variability
in the reporting of KT interventions, which illuminates
the difficulties faced in intervention replicability. Weoften felt a strong pull to give authors the benefit of the
doubt when it came to assessing the quality of their
reporting of BCIs; however, we believe that it is crucialthat the information required by the WIDER recommen-
dations is public and easily accessible in order to under-
stand, replicate, and evaluate KT interventions. Missinginformation potentially points to methodological flaws
and indicates the limitations of current scientific practice
[5]. In the age of open access and online journals withunlimited ‘space ’for additional files to supplement research
articles, what is the rationale for leaving information out?
As of 2011, journals such as Addiction and ImplementationScience require detailed descriptions of BCIs based on the
WIDER recommendations framework in order to be
published; therefore, it is important to be able toAlbrecht et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:52 Page 4 of 5
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/52
measure and compare the ab ility of studies to meet
these recommendations. We believe that this checklist
is one way to facilitate the measurement and comparison
between a variety of KT intervention studies.
Additional files
Additional file 1: Improving reporting of behavioural interventions:
WIDER Consensus Statement.
Additional file 2: Table S2. WIDER Recommendations Checklist,
Phase One.
Additional file 3: Table S3. WIDER Recommendations Checklist,
Phase Two.
Additional file 4: Table S4. WIDER Checklist Development, Phase Three.
Abbreviations
BCI:Behavior change interventions; KT: Knowledge translation;
CONSORT: Consolidated standards of reporting trials; RCT: Randomized
controlled trial; WIDER: Workgroup for intervention development and
evaluation research.
Competing interests
The authors declare that there are no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
LA conceptualized the checklist and coordinated the studies that facilitated
the development of the checklist. SDS conceptualized the systematic reviews
and secured study funding from the Canadian Institutes for Health Research
(CIHR) and the Faculty of Nursing at the University of Alberta. She designed
and led the systematic reviews. MA participated in the second stage of
checklist development. DA participated in the third stage of checklist
development. All authors contributed to manuscript drafts and reviewed the
final manuscript.
Authors ’information
We would like to acknowledge the organizations that provide research
personnel funding for members of our research team. SDS holds a CIHR
New Investigator Award and Population Health Investigator Award from the
Alberta Heritage Foundation for Medical Research (now Alberta Innovates –
Health Solutions). MA is a PhD student in the Faculty of Nursing and
currently holds a Canadian Child Health Clinician-Scientist (CCHCSP) Doctoral
Award, an Alberta Registered Nurses Educational Trust (ARNET) President ’s
Scholarship (Doctoral level), and a Doctoral Recruitment Scholarship (Faculty
of Nursing, Univesity of Alberta). She would also like to thank the Women &
Children ’s Health Research Institute (WCHRI) for their support for her PhD
research. DA is an undergraduate student in the Faculty of Nursing Bilingual
Program and currently holds a CIHR Health Professional Student Research
Award Designation, an Alberta Innovates –Health Solutions Summer
Studentship, a Women & Children ’s Health Research Institute (WCHRI)
Summer Studentship, and a Faculty of Nursing Summer Studentship.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank CIHR (Knowledge Synthesis Grant # KRS 102071)
and the University of Alberta, Faculty of Nursing (Establishment Grant) for
providing the funding for the systematic reviews. We would also like to
thank all of the people involved with the systematic reviews, including the
team at Alberta Research Centre for Health Evidence (ARCHE) at the
University of Alberta; the ECHO Research Team, including Kathy O ’Leary,
Deborah Olmstead and Jane Fryer; and Dr. Erna Snelgrove-Clarke. We are
grateful to the reviewers of our work, Charles Abraham and Lou Atkins,
for your thoughtful and thorough feedback on earlier versions of this
manuscript. Your feedback has greatly enhanced our publication.
Received: 8 August 2012 Accepted: 10 May 2013
Published: 16 May 2013References
1. Abraham C: Designing and evaluating interve ntions to change health-related
behaviour patterns. InRandomized Clinical Trials of Nonpharmacologic
Treatments. Edited by Boutron I, Ravaud P, Moher D. London: Chapman & Hall;
2012:357 –368.
2. Dane AV, Schneider BH: Program integrity in primary and early secondary
prevention: are implementation effects out of control? Clin Psychol Rev
1998, 18:23–45.
3. Gresham FM, Gansle KA, Noell GH: Treatment integrity in applied behavior
analysis with children. J Appl Behav Anal 1993, 26:257 –263.
4. Moncher FJ, Prinz RJ: Treatment fidelity in outcome studies. Clin Psychol
Rev1991, 11:247 –266.
5. Odom SI, Brown WH, Frey T, Karasu N, Smith-Canter LL, Strain PS:
Evidence-based practices for young children with autism:
contributions for single-subject design research. Focus Autism Other
Dev Disabil 2003, 18:166 –175.
6. Michie S, Fixsen D, Grimshaw JM, Eccles MP: Specifying and reporting
complex behaviour change interventions: the need for a scientific
method. Implement Sci 2009, 4(40):1 –6.
7. Consolidated Standards of Rep orting Trials (CONSORT) Group: Consolidated
standards of reporting trials (CONSORT) statement. http://www.consort-statement.
org/home/.
8. Davidson KW, Goldstein M, Kaplan RM, Kaufmann PG, Knatterund GL,
Orleans CT, Spring B, Trudeau KJ, Whitlock EP: Evidence-based behavioural
medicine: what is it and how do we achieve it? Ann Behav Med 2003,
26(3):161 –71.
9. Abraham C, Michie S: A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychol 2008, 27:379 –387.
10. Workgroup for Intervention Development and Evaluation Reporting
(WIDER): Improving reporting of behavioural interventions: WIDER consensus
statement. http://interventiondesign.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2009/02/
wider-recommendations.pdf.
11. West R: Advancing the science of behavio ur change: a plea for scientific
reporting. Addiction 2008, 103:1409 –1410. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2008.02341.x.
12. Cochrane Effective Practice and Organisation of Care Review Group: Data
collection checklist. http://epoc.cochrane.org/sites/epoc.cochrane.org/files/
uploads/datacollectionchecklist.pdf.
13. Scott SD, Albrecht L, O ’Leary K, Ball GDC, Dryden DM, Hartling L, Hofmeyer
A, Jones CA, Kovacs Burns K, Newton AS, Thompson D, Klassen TP:
Systematic review of knowledge translation strategies in the allied
health professions. Implement Sci 2012, 7:70.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-52
Cite this article as: Albrecht et al. :D e v e l o p m e n to fac h e c k l i s tt oa s s e s st h e
quality of reporting of knowledge translation interventions using the
Workgroup for Intervention Development and Evaluation Research (WIDER)
recommendations. Implementation Science 2013 8:52.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitAlbrecht et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:52 Page 5 of 5
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/52
