RESEARCH Open Access
Barriers and enablers to delivery of the Healthy
Kids Check: an analysis informed by the Theoretical
Domains Framework and COM-B model
Karyn E Alexander1*, Bianca Brijnath2and Danielle Mazza3
Abstract
Background: More than a fifth of Australian children arrive at school developmentally vulnerable. To counteract
this, the Healthy Kids Check (HKC), a one-off health assessment aimed at preschool children, was introduced in
2008 into Australian general practice. Delivery of services has, however, remained low. The Theoretical Domains
Framework, which provides a method to understand behaviours theoretically, can be condensed into three core
components: capability, opportunity and motivation, and the COM-B model. Utilising this system, this study aimed
to determine the barriers and enablers to delivery of the HKC, to inform the design of an intervention to promote
provision of HKC services in Australian general practice.
Methods: Data from 6 focus group discussions with 40 practitioners from general practices in socio-culturally
diverse areas of Melbourne, Victoria, were analysed using thematic analysis.
Results: Many practitioners expressed uncertainty regarding their capabilities and the practicalities of delivering
HKCs, but in some cases HKCs had acted as a catalyst for professional development. Key connections between
immunisation services and delivery of HKCs prompted practices to have systems of recall and reminder in place.
Standardisation of methods for developmental assessment and streamlined referral pathways affected practitioners ’
confidence and motivation to perform HKCs.
Conclusion: Application of a systematic framework effectively demonstrated how a number of behaviours could be
targeted to increase delivery of HKCs. Interventions need to target practice systems, the support of office staff and
referral options, as well as practitioners ’training. Many behavioural changes could be applied through a single
intervention programme delivered by the primary healthcare organisations charged with local healthcare needs
(Medicare Locals) providing vital links between general practice, community and the health of young children.
Background
Since 2007, significant reforms in Australia ’s health and
hospital system have shifted their focus towards preven-
tion and a multi-sector government response, in a bid to
improve healthcare and curtail the costs associated with
an ageing population [1]. Local primary care organisa-
tions, known as Medicare Locals, are charged with pro-
viding the infrastructure to support identification of risk
and implementation of preventive health programmes
[2]. Outside the health system, educational reforms targetearly childhood and address intergenerational disadvan-
tage [3]. These initiatives seek to improve health in early
childhood, for despite Australia having one of the highest
life expectancies world-wide, under-5 morbidity and mor-
tality remains disproportionately high; 37% of Australian
children suffer chronic health conditions and around 7%
have a disability [4]. Additionally, 42% of 5-year-olds suffer
dental caries [5], and more than a fifth of Australian chil-
dren arrive at school developmentally vulnerable [6].
Although a review of the evidence for child health
surveillanceahas found little evidence for effectiveness
(principally due to a lack of clinical guidelines), the report
concluded that there was a need to rethink how child
surveillance was conducted [7]. Australia has a system of
publically funded child health surveillance visits provided* Correspondence: karyn.alexander@monash.edu
1Department of General Practice, School of Primary Health Care, Monash
University, Building 3, 270 Ferntree Gully Road, Notting Hill, Melbourne,
Victoria 3168, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2014 Alexander et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.Alexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
by Maternal and Child Health Nurses (MCHN) through
local government. Delivery of services varies considerably
state-wide, but in the state of Victoria –where this study
was conducted –services engage more than 90% of fam-
ilies in a child ’s first year. However, contact diminishes as
the child gets older, so that by 3 ½ years of age, less than60% of children complete health surveillance visits [8]. In
contrast, general practice services are delivered from pre-
dominantly privately owned clinics. Rebates for services –
inclusive of some preventive health assessments –are
available from the national insurer ‘Medicare ’with the in-
tent to secure universal access to subsidised primary careservices. Consequently, more than 80% of the Australian
population visit a general practitioner (GP) each year [9].
To increase opportunities for preventive health with
young children, in 2008 ‘The Healthy Kids Check ’(HKC)
[10], a one-off health assessment aimed at preschool chil-
dren, was introduced into general practice, where 12% ofGP-patient contacts are with children [11]. Administered
by GPs and general practice nurses (PNs), the HKC
comprises an assessment of growth and development, andoffers health promotion opportunities (Table 1) on the
occasion of a child ’s preschool immunisations. Despite a
Medicare rebate being applicable, uptake has been lowerthan anticipated, with only 16% of 4-year-olds completing
a HKC in the first year. The state of Victoria ranked sixth
out of seven states in terms of proportions of children re-ceiving HKC services in 2012 [12]. Since its introduction,
there have been no empirical studies examining the fac-
tors influencing uptake of the HKC in general practice.
Barriers to the consistent delivery of preventive care for
young children, prior to the introduction of the HKC, in-
cluded insufficient time, poor financial reward, and a lackof community resources ( e.g., information and referral ser-
vices) [13]. Studies from the United States (US) have iden-
tified practitioner barriers to the US system of ‘well-child
care. ’These include knowledge gaps, lack of confidence
using validated tools [14,15], insufficient understanding of
early intervention [16] (which hinders detection ofdevelopmental delays), inadequate office staff and poor re-
muneration [12]. For parents in Australia, our previous
research showed that parent decision-making aroundaccessing preventive care for their children was influenced
by the birth order of the child, cultural health beliefs,
healthcare costs, and limited knowledge about early inter-vention [17].
Therefore, for an increase in HKC services to occur,
the behaviour change processes of several interactinggroups of people, including parents and healthcare pro-
viders, operating at various organisational levels, needs
to be considered. The development of such a ‘complex
intervention ’must be underpinned by local evidence and
rigorous psychological theoretical constructs, to both
facilitate behaviour change and provide an explanationfor the mechanism of change. The use of a theoretical
framework in the design and evaluation of interventions
has been increasingly emphasised by implementation re-searchers [18-20]. Guidance from the United Kingdom ’s
Medical Research Council proposes that where psycho-
logical theory underpins the iterative processes involvedin designing a complex intervention, innovation is more
likely to succeed [21].
T h eT h e o r e t i c a lD o m a i n sF r a m e w o r k( T D F )i sam e t h o d
established to understand behaviours theoretically so that
processes can be effectively targeted for change [19]. The
original TDF
bconsisted of 12 domains and was developed
by consensus from a combinat ion of 33 psychological and
organisational theories to provide a guide towards imple-
menting evidence-based practice (Table 2) [19]. This ap-proach seeks to make psychological theory more accessible
to health service researchers. The TDF has been widely im-
plemented across a variety of settings [22] and includesanalysis of preventive health including preconception care
[23], hand hygiene behaviours in a hospital setting [24],
and human papilloma virus counselling in primary care[25]. The 12 domains of the TDF can be condensed into
three core components: capability, opportunity and motiv-
ation (Figure 1) [26]. The COM-B model demonstratesthat human behaviour (B) results from the interaction be-
tween personal physical and psychological capabilities (C),
to utilise social and environmental opportunities (O) viamotivators (M) that are reflective (thinking with the head)
or automatic (emotional- ‘thinking ’with the heart).
Table 1 Components of the healthy kids check (2008)
Mandatory Non-mandatory
Height Discuss eating habits
Weight Discuss physical activityEyesight Speech and language developmentHearing Fine motor skillsOral health Gross motor skillsQuestion toilet habits Behaviour and moodNote allergies Other examinations as necessaryTable 2 The theoretical domains framework
(Michie 2005) [19]
DOMAINS
Knowledge Memory, Attention and Decision
processes
Skills Environmental Context and
Resources
Social/professional role and identity Social InfluencesBeliefs about capabilities EmotionBeliefs about consequences Behavioural RegulationMotivation and goals Nature of the BehavioursAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 2 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
Utilising the TDF and COM-B, the aims of the present
study were to determine the barriers and enablers to deliv-
ery of the HKC, and to inform the design of an interven-
tion to promote provision of HKC services, in Australian
general practice.
Method
Design
Focus group discussions with GPs and PNs were under-
taken to explore their knowledge-behaviour gaps. Group
dynamics were viewed as more likely than individual
interviews to reveal attitudes and experiences, and the
underlying reasons for specific behaviours [27].
Sample
Three groups of GPs and three groups of PNs (total
40 practitioners) were recruited from three socio-
culturally diverse urban areas of Melbourne, Victoria,
broadly categorised as high income (Bayside), low in-
come (Westgate), and culturally diverse (Dandenong).The study was advertised by newsletter and invitations
were faxed to clinics served by Medicare Locals in these
areas. To increase responses, phone calls were made to in-
dividual practice managers and PNs by one of the re-
searchers (KA), and participants could recommend other
practitioners (snowballing), with a limit of one GP and
one PN from each clinic.
Procedure
An interview guide based on the TDF was designed to
prompt focus group discussions (Table 3). To avoid ‘group
hierarchies ’, focus groups were divided by practitioner (ex-
cept for one attendee, a practice nurse, who opted to at-
tend the GP group) (Table 4). Focus groups took place
between June 2011 and October 2011 (three years follow-
ing introduction of the HKC), lasted approximately 90 mi-
nutes and were facilitated by the first two authors (who
declared their positions), one a GP , trained in qualitative
research methods, the other, an experienced qualitative re-
searcher. A voucher valued at $200 for GPs and $80 for
Figure 1 Map of Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) to Sources of Behavior on COM-B System [26].Alexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 3 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
PNs was given to each practitioner in appreciation of their
time. This incentive discrepancy reflects differences in
average earnings between practitioner groups and known
difficulties with recruiting practitioners to research pro-jects [28]. Focus groups were audio-recorded and later
transcribed for analysis. A report was emailed to each par-
ticipant to solicit feedback. Ethics approval was obtainedfrom Monash University, and all participants provided
written informed consent.
Analysis
Data were analysed by applying categories from the TDF
in a recursive process that followed the customary steps of
thematic analysis [29]. Specifically, after reading throughTable 3 Prompts for focus groups according to Michie ’s theoretical domains
Theoretical domains Examples of interview prompts
Knowledge Do you know about the mandatory and non-mandatory components of HKCs?
Do you know about the RACGP guidelines for child preventive health?
Skills How have you learned how to do a HKC? Have you had any training for HKCs?
Which components of the HKC do you perform? Are there any specific areas of difficulty?One of the non-mandatory components is questioning the social and emotional behaviour.
Do you ask about that?
Can you assess the social and emotional well-being of a three-year-old?What do you think about measuring children and calculating BMI?
Social/professional role Who do you think should be doing HKCs?
How do they fit with the checks done by MCHNs?Do you think general practitioners have a role in preventive health in general?Why did you set up HKCs in your practice?
Beliefs about capabilities How good are we at picking up problems in young children?
How easy or difficult is it to do a HKC?Do you think that you ’ve got the skills (to do a HKC)?
Do you fear that you might miss something? How confident are you that you can pick up a problem?How confident are you with the assessment of social and emotional wellbeing
Beliefs about consequences Do you think HKCs are worthwhile? Do you think they should be scrapped?
In your experience of doing health checks with this age group, did you come across problems in your
population?
What do you think about the evidence base behind the HKC?How do you think parents view the HKC? Has anyone refused a check?
Motivation and goals Why do you do HKCs? Why don ’t you do HKCs?
Memory, attention and decision processes Is performing a HKC something you usually do?
Do you use any prompts?Has anyone decided NOT to do a HKC?
Environmental context and resources Do you have any systems in place to run a HKC?
Do you have the equipment? What do you use to help with a HKC?Is anyone using any questionnaires or tools with a Healthy Kids Check?Is there anything specific about WHERE you practice-your population group?
Social influences Has anyone used any reminders or invitations for HKCs or do you just wait for people to ask?
What do you think about the policy change that links the HKC with the Family Tax Benefits?
Emotion How do you feel about health assessments with children? Does it give you any particular
feelings or emotions?
Behavioural regulation Are there procedures or ways of working that encourage you to do HKCs?Nature of the behaviours What do you currently do about HKCs
What about weighing an overweight child? How do you approach an overweight child?
HKC: Healthy Kids Check; RACGP: Royal Australian College of GPs; MCHN: Maternal and Child Health Nurse.Alexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 4 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
the entire dataset, the first two authors independently
coded the data from each transcript and assigned initial
‘code names, ’then collaborated and discussed choices,
with a third researcher available to resolve any differencesin opinion. Data were imported into NVivo 8 [30] and de-
identified. After agreement had been reached, an add-
itional step was taken to match code names to themesrepresented by the ‘domains ’within the TDF. This re-
quired the researchers to re-read data within the codes,
then allocate the codes to the appropriate domains. Thissometimes meant that the data coded under one code
name was categorised into two or three different domains
within the TDF. All codes could be applied to at least onedomain. From there the domains were mapped to the
COM-B system (Table 5).
There were two domains of the TDF that we did not
match any data to: the ‘Emotional/Automatic ’aspects of
‘Motivation ’and the ‘Nature of behaviours ’. With regard
to the former domain, although specific questions hadbeen asked about emotions felt by practitioners when
dealing with young children and health screening, re-
sponses were captured under the theme ‘GP attitudes
and feelings ’. This was assigned to the domain, ‘Profes-
sional role and identity ’, and ultimately mapped to ‘Mo-
tivation ’in the COM-B model. The domain ‘Nature of
behaviours ’, part of the original list of domains within
the Framework, could not be assigned to the COM-B
model because whilst it described context (current prac-
tice), it did not provide a source of behaviour. This do-
main was subsequently removed in a review of theFramework which tested its validity with a second group
of behavioural change experts [31].
Results
Focus group captured a diverse range of practitioner ex-periences with the HKC, in each study area: some had
not, as yet, provided a single HKC, others delivered afew checks occasionally, and some practices regularly
booked HKC appointments or extended to provide
entire clinics of HKC services. The study found that,overall, practitioners reacted positively towards providing
preventive healthcare to young children. They conceptua-
lised this in terms of the provision of immunisationservices and HKCs and, to a lesser extent, opportunistic
growth and developmental assessments during ‘sick-child ’
consultations. Below we describe how our data alignswithin the TDF and COM-B model (Table 6).
Capability
Skills, knowledge, memory, attention and decision processes
Practitioners ’self-assessment of their capabilities to screen
the health of young children varied, but all practitionersheld reservations about particular components of the
HKC. GPs generally thought that they had sufficient skills
and knowledge, but when challenged to consider eachcomponent of the HKC, they were uncertain about how to
test the vision, hearing and social-emotional health of this
age group, and admitted to difficulties recalling child devel-opmental stages. PNs were not prepared to conduct HKCs
until they had received specific training and expressed
concerns that they risked antagonising parents if they sug-gested a child ’s development deviated from normal, par-
ticularly with behavioural problems, social and emotional
difficulties, weight and body mass index:
I don ’t think I ’m equipped to assess a four-year-old
enough, even though I have had two [children]. I don ’t
feel comfortable sometimes …talking to parents if
there ’s issues. It ’s quite daunting …parents don ’t like
to hear that something ’s wrong with their child.
(PN1 Dandenong).
How do you, if you ’ve got an overweight 3 ½-year-old,
if you ’ve not got the training? How do you deal with
that without really offending the parent?
(PN1 Bayside).
Behavioural regulation
Practitioners perceived that there could be a wide variabil-ity in the quality of HKCs and thought they should be
standardised for greater consistency across practices and
between practitioners. Participants compared the struc-
ture of primary healthcare in Australia, the United
Kingdom and New Zealand; they believed the fact thatindividual practices were not held to account for the
public health of a local population called for greater
regulation of clinical behaviours.
It’s not like in England where you have a list and you
know who ’re your customers …We know patients
float around here, there and everywhere, especially
with kids …if you ’re going to do it properly you do it
in a programmed, reproducible, managed [way].(GP1 Bayside).Table 4 Focus groups according to practitioner and area
Name and description
of area of MelbourneParticipant
numbers in GPfocus groups
(Total =22)Participant numbers
in practice nurse focusgroups (Total =18)
(all female)
Bayside upper
socio-economic6 (3 female 3 male) 6
Dandenong lower
socio-economicCulturally and
linguistically
diverse9 + 1 practice nurse
(6 female 4 male)6
Westgate lower
socio-economic7 (4 female 3 male) 5Alexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 5 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
Table 5 Mapping of codes to themes from Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) and COM-B system
Code assigned directly to transcripts from focus
groupsThemes from TDF COM-B system
Rationale for doing HKCs** Knowledge Psychological CAPABILITY
Memory-remembering to do HKCs/preventive Memory, attention and decision
processesGrowth and weight component of HKC**
Systems and prompts** Behavioural regulationStructure-logistics (how the clinic is run)***Tax incentive issues prompting HKC
Standardisation of HKCs or components within
Medicare and item numbersImmunisation or vaccination issuesFinancial barriers (for practitioners)Dental component of HKC** Skills Physical CAPABILITYEye or vision component of HKC**Hearing component of HKC**Child support network, e.g., childcare & kinder** Social influences Social OPPORTUNITY
Parent concernRole of MCHNPopulation screeningSocio-cultural issuesResource allocation as equity/ethical concern**Systems and prompts for HKCs** Environmental context and
resourcesPhysical OPPORTUNITY
Structure-opportunistic (appointments)**Structure-logistics (how the clinic is run)***Structure- ITSpace and resources including ‘Purple Book ’
Time barrier
Dental component of HKC** Beliefs about capabilities MOTIVATION- ReflectiveEye or vision component of HKC**Social & emotional health component of HKC***GP knowledge and skills**PN attitude and feelings**PN knowledge and skillsRole of the PN**PN attitude and feelings** Professional role and identityRole of the PN**GP attitude and feelingsRole of GPSocial & emotional health component of HKC***Child support network, e.g., childcare & kinder**
Motivation (to do HKC or preventive care) Motivation and goalsPreventive healthcareRationale for doing HKCs** Beliefs about consequencesOutcomes from HKCs
Early interventionAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 6 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
Using specific screening tools was put forward as one
solution to counter variability in practice and regulatingstandards.
Give us the tool …a tool that everybody can use. The
same tool, because if we ’re all doing it separately then
where ’s the base to start from? (PN2 Dandenong).
Opportunity
Practitioners who had the capabilities to conduct HKCs
were either encouraged or deterred from performing HKCsaccording to conditions established by the physical and
social environment, within and external to their clinics.
These shaped the opportunities for establishing systemsand conducting HKCs from their practices.
Environmental context and resources
Practitioners believed that computerised prompts worked
to promote the delivery of HKCs but recalled many phys-
ical barriers including cost and difficulty accessing screen-ing tools. For example, one PN had tried to source eye
charts and was told by the company that the charts were
only available to government employed MCHN services.Lack of supportive health literature, especially the ‘demise ’
of the ‘Purple Book ’, was also a source of much discussion.
The purple-coloured booklet, entitled ‘Get Set 4 Life -
Habits for Healthy Kids ’, was initially allocated by the
national government to support health promotion as-
pects of the HKC. However, by 2011, hard copies hadrun out and the book ’s content moved online. Delivered
i nac h i l d - f r i e n d l yf o r m a tc o n taining cartoon characters
and stickers, the book was viewed positively by practi-tioners because ‘It makes you feel like you ’ve done
something ’(GP1 Westgate).
PNs stated that the space to accommodate HKC exami-
nations was inadequate at times. When an entire family
attended for one child to have a HKC, conditions became
cramped, and practitioners faced additional pressures assiblings quickly became bored and restless. PNs said such
experiences undermined their professional image and left
them feeling dissatisfied.They ’re often with other siblings and they ’ve already
been at the surgery half an hour, and by the end ofit you ’re feeling quite pressured for time and you
can tell everyone is well and truly sick of this.
(PN1 Westgate).
Social influences
Social structures within the practice influenced the deliv-ery of HKCs, and two factors appeared essential: provision
of vaccination services and employment of a PN at the
practice. Where clinic protocols related vaccination ser-vices to the HKC, designated staff were often assigned to
manage a system of invitations, recalls and reminders.
We send our recalls every couple of months, and we
do have really good results from that. We have most
people come back when they get their immunisations.(PN2 Westgate).
In these situations, PNs were ‘trained up ’to conduct
HKCs, so that demand could be fulfilled:
They [GPs] want practice nurses to come in and drive
all these things because they haven ’t got the time.
(PN2 Bayside).
Additionally, where a practice had a practitioner who
‘championed ’the promotion of preventive healthcare for
young children, the clinic ’s capacity to deliver HKCs in-
creased. GPs who had a special interest in child health,
for example, made particular efforts to accommodate
HKCs or assessed child development opportunisticallywith vaccination consultations. The professional mix in
the practice also influenced its provision. If a paediatri-
cian or MCHN consulted from the same office space,practitioners believed this promoted the overall delivery
of child preventive services, and they supported these
shared care models.
In the broader social environment, recent fiscal policy
changes were noted to influence parents ’uptake of HKCs.
In 2011, the federal government determined that for aTable 5 Mapping of codes to themes from Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) and COM-B system (Continued)
Bureaucracy and ‘red tape ’barriers
Social & emotional health component of HKC***Growth and weight component of HKC**Resource allocation as equity/ethical concern** MOTIVATION-AutomaticHearing component of HKC** Nature of behaviours Not included in COM-B model but
each code is a duplicateGP knowledge and skills**
Structure-logistics (how the clinic is run)***Structure-opportunistic (appointments)**
**mapped to two different themes from TDF; ***mapped to three different themes from TDF.Alexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 7 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
Table 6 Summary of the evidence, application of TDF and COM-B and proposed interventions
Evidence TDF COM-B Proposed intervention
Capability
GPs did not always know how to
assess aspects of developmentKnowledge Capability-Psychological Education and training which incorporates:
PNs did not know how to do HKCs
(until they had received training)Knowledge about “Early Intervention ”
GPs did not always remember how
to assess overall developmentMemory Physical examination techniques
GPs conducting HKCs were uncertain
about which tests to use and how todo themPhysical skills Capability-Physical Structured developmental assessment
and evidence behind this
Interpersonal skills training
PNs wanted training on skills
required for HKCsTools appropriate to primary care
PNs did not know how to manage
parent reactions to possibility ofabnormality in child ’s development.Interpersonal skills Capability-Psychological
Variable quality of HKCs Behavioural regulation
Opportunity
Equipment barriers Environmental context and
resourcesPhysical opportunity Funding for equipment and tools,
including information technologySupportive health promotion
brochures
Space in clinic to accommodate the
HKC examinationsProvision of health promotion literature
Medical contact with children
especially vaccinationsSocial influences Social opportunity Education and training which incorporates:
Practice structure
Employing a PN Office systems including recall and reminder
Having staff responsible for
managing a recall systemTools appropriate for use in general practice
(time saving)
Having a “HKC Champion ”
The professional mix in the practiceCompeting interests of practice
population healthcare needs
Practitioners had insufficient time“Healthy Start for School ”-Tax
incentive to complete HKCStrengthen government support for
delivery of early childhood interventionacross servicesIncrease in Medicare rebate
Belief that general practice competes
with other service providers to
provide HKCs
Motivation
Belief that MCHNs have ownership
and expertise in preventivehealthcare for young childrenProfessional role and identity Reflective motivation Education and training which address
capability and professional roles withtask delegation
GPs find process tedious and place
HKCs low priority
Alternative model of developmental
assessment with early childhoodeducators playing primary role
Developing the role of the PN in
Australian general practiceProfessional role and identity &
Beliefs about capabilitiesAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 8 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
family to receive a particular tax-benefit, a health check
had to be obtained for each child turning four years of age
[32] (from a MCHN or GP). Practitioners generally agreed
with this policy, and believed it encouraged the assess-ment of more vulnerable children.
Discussion about how increases in government rebates
for HKCs (as they were brought into line with otherhealth assessments and rebated according to time spent
with the patient) had encouraged some practitioner ’s ef-
forts towards establishing services, also revealed percep-tions of market competition:
(Laughing) The practice nurses in my practice at the
beginning of this year were saying, ‘Oh, maternal and
child health nurses, they ’re in the best position to do
it.’We’re saying, ‘No, no we get money for this. We
need to be doing this! ’(GP1 Dandenong)
The competing priorities of general practice: chronic
disease management, health assessments for other popu-
lation groups ( e.g., aged-care assessments) and acute care
needs, created time pressures, and highlighted social en-vironmental barriers still remaining for practitioners.
Motivation
The evolution of respective practitioner roles aroundproviding HKCs tied in with beliefs about capabilities
and beliefs about the outcomes resulting from provision
of preventive healthcare to young children. ‘Motivation ’
is a key factor to understanding the uptake of HKCs.
General practitioners –professional role and identity
Many GPs struggled to understand why HKCs had been
introduced, believing they acted as a ‘safety net ’to‘catch ’those children who had missed out on MCHN services
(Bayside GP discussion). They did not perceive them-
selves as being active participants in childhood surveil-
lance, and found the HKC procedure to be tedious.
I didn ’t do medicine to do four-year-old health checks
…You could sit all day and do four-year-old checks,
over-75 checks, over-45, you know …You want to see
the acute illnesses. (GP2 Bayside)
Most GPs thought that the role of ‘screening ’young
children belonged to MCHNs. Although they acknowl-
e d g e dt h e yh a dar o l et op l a yi np r e v e n t i v eh e a l t hi ngeneral, one-off health assessments of preschool chil-
dren were given a low priority, and their capacity was
l i m i t e db yc o m p e t i n ga n dm o r eu r g e n td e m a n d so ntheir time.
If you give the GP ’s so much prevention, because it ’s
the hugest, biggest, fattest end of the iceberg …it
takes up so much time you don ’t actually get to the
other stuff and you have people dying at your doorbecause they can ’t get in. (GP1 Westgate)
Several practitioners proposed an alternative model of
childhood surveillance that encompassed a secondary
role for GPs, whereby identified problems could be re-
ferred to the GP for further assessment. They believeddevelopmental problems would be more easily identified
in group situations where children could be assessed
against their peers. They targeted kindergarten teachersas being ideally placed to assess child development be-
cause they already had a role appraising children ’s
‘school-readiness ’.Table 6 Summary of the evidence, application of TDF and COM-B and proposed interventions (Continued)
PNs expressed low levels of
self-confidence with some of thecomponents of the HKC
PNs preferred clear boundaries when
delivering HKCs
PN personal drive for professional
developmentGoals, intentions and motivation
& Positive beliefs about
consequencesOpportunity to build capacity in early
childhood development involving
other professionalsHKCs used by some practitioners to
develop professional expertise
PNs more confident about their
abilities were more satisfied with
outcomesCentralisation and dissemination of
information about community
resources
Outcomes and referral pathways are
important to practitioners beliefs
GPs expressed low confidence with
evidence behind HKCsNegative beliefs about
consequences
Belief that timing of HKC is too late
for early interventionAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 9 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
Practice nurses –professional role and identity and beliefs
about capabilities
PNs thought that their role in Australian general prac-
tice was still in its infancy (compared with places like
the UK), and they talked about establishing a foothold in
general practice and striving to project a professionalimage. They also believed that the provision of HKCs was
the remit of the MCHN. The perception in one group dis-
cussion was that MCHNs ‘got their nose out of joint ’
(PN3 Bayside) when HKCs were introduced, so that they
had ‘retaliated ’with a radio advertising campaign. This
inter-professional conflict created anxiety for PNs, andthey conveyed low levels of self-confidence about their
capacity to provide child health checks.
Given that the infant welfare centres do have the
expertise, if I was a mother I know which one I ’d
rather go. (PN4 Bayside)
Goals, intentions and motivation and positive beliefs about
consequences
Nevertheless, PNs also perceived that GPs wanted
them to ‘drive ’t h ed e l i v e r yo fH K C sa n d ,o n c et r a i n -
ing was offered and clear professional boundaries hadbeen established, the opportunity to advance their pro-
fessional standing motivated them towards providing
services.
I remember saying at the beginning, ‘I don ’t want to
do them ’because I don ’t know anything about them
…and then they offered the education and I thought,
‘It’s a really good education, it adds to …my repertoire
…my knowledge base. ’(PN3 Bayside)
Whilst the majority of practitioners were slow to em-
brace HKCs, a few readily used the provision of HKCsto support their personal professional development.
Two GPs (one a GP in Bayside, the other in Westgate
focus group), who had additional qualifications inpaediatrics, sought children from vaccination consulta-
tions to opportunistically conduct developmental as-
sessments or HKCs, and two PNs were independently
conducting HKC ‘clinics ’, without GPs, and had estab-
lished clear referral pathways. These PNs were muchmore confident about their abilities and expressed more
satisfaction that the problems they identified validated
doing HKCs.
We have quite a few that go on for speech therapy or
we have them on care plans because they ’ve got
learning difficulties or things like that …they ’re able
to access better services …Not everybody needs it …
but the one or two that you do pick up that can getservices, it makes it all worthwhile. (PN2 Dandenong)Of interest was the fact that both of these PNs partici-
pated in the focus group in the Dandenong region, an
area which serves a large migrant population of lowsocio-economic status.
Negative beliefs about consequences
Many practitioners, however, voiced concerns about the
overall value of HKCs and low levels of evidence for
childhood surveillance and screening.
[Chlamydia and bowel cancer screening] have an
evidence-base to [them] …And then we have this
healthy four-year-old test –but what ’s the evidence
base for this? (GP1 Dandenong focus group)
Practitioners recognised that ‘early intervention ’was
important but felt defeated by the fact that the HKC was
linked to immunisations given at four years of age, anage they considered too late for effective intervention
before the start of school. Where services were difficult
to access or where there was less certainty about what todo for ‘test-positive-children, ’practitioners were further
disinclined to carry out HKCs. As one GP said, ‘So you
find something wrong, but what ’s the management after
that? ’(GP2 Westgate). The ‘can of worms ’analogy cap-
tured their reticence and the opening up of a myriad of
difficulties, particularly with social-emotional and behav-ioural health assessments. Some practitioners thought
that particular parent groups would feel judged:
(GP2) Who will talk about this social and emotional
child? Because they will be constantly thinking about
the child being taken away from them, I don ’t think
they will even be keen to discuss it.
(GP3) And this is a huge can of worms if we start
digging for emotional and [social health]
(Dandenong focus group)
Discussion
We have applied a systematic process to our data ana-
lysis with a view to developing an intervention designedto increase preventive healthcare for young children.
Despite the fact that our sample populations were sourced
from three very diverse socioeconomic backgrounds, wefound that within each focus group, participants described
a range of experiences from practices both well established
with delivering HKCs and others just venturing out withservice delivery. All focus groups expressed approval for
fiscal-type interventions that maximised participation
from population groups likely to be more vulnerable, andall groups discussed the likelihood that HKCs may dupli-
cate services offered by MCHNs. Although small in num-
ber, the area where two PNs had established specificAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 10 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
HKC-clinics has rates of developmental vulnerability al-
most twice the state average [6], indicating they may have
responded to an increased need in their populations.
Analysis using the TDF afforded a detailed understand-
ing of the barriers and enablers that impact individually,
within and external to the general practice environment,and distillation of the findings into the COM-B model has
set the stage for developing the components of a complex
intervention. Analysis indicates that a number of behav-iours could be targeted, including practitioners ’skills and
knowledge as well as their beliefs about respective practi-
tioner roles. The opportunities afforded by the mix ofpractitioners, the roles of support staff, the availability of
equipment, and the social milieu created by government
policy, suggest additional interventions. These are tabu-lated and discussed in detail below (Table 6).
At the practitioner level, PNs ’capabilities could benefit
from education and skills training that should incorpor-ate interpersonal skills training to overcome their trepi-
dation communicating developmental deficits to parents.
The parent sensitivities they described reflect those foundin a study of MCHNs, where strong parent-nurse relation-
ships dissipated some of the difficulties experienced dis-
cussing weight with parents of young children [33]. Fromthis study, clear demarcation of roles increased PN confi-
dence, and training schemes could utilise respected leaders
from both general practice and nursing to model sharedroles for delivering different components of the HKC. For
example, components of the HKC that incorporate clinical
judgement and decision-making may be more appropriatet ot h er o l eo fG P s .A p p o r t i o n e dr o l e sa r ea l r e a d yap a r to f
Australian general practice where practice nurses assist a
supervising GP with aged care health assessments andchronic disease management, using a team-based model of
care. This also fits with international processes, outside of
the US, where child health surveillance is a divided respon-sibility between different professionals [34].
Expressions of low confidence with the evidence be-
hind the HKC, ambivalence towards outcomes, and con-fusion as to why it had been introduced in the first
place, explained some of the reluctance of GPs to imple-
ment the HKC. Much criticism has been levelled at the
low levels of evidence for some of the existing compo-
nents of the HKC [35] and the inclusion of social andemotional ‘mental ’health assessments [36]. Information
and provision of various developmental screening tools
would serve to demonstrate the gains to be made whenusing structured developmental assessments, which have
an evidence base for increasing the detection rate and
reducing delays [37,38]. This would help to ‘standardise ’
social and emotional assessments in particular, an aspect
of development practitioners found particularly difficult
to assess [39]. Practitioner education needs to be moreexplicit about the objectives of early intervention, theadvances that could be made as well as the limitations of
current evidence [40]. Training workshops could be deliv-
ered through Medicare Locals, organisations that havepreviously assisted practices establish ‘chronic disease
management ’programmes, and are positively viewed by
practitioners as a source of assistance [41].
Findings in relation to the opportunities afforded by
the broader social environment indicate key connections
between immunisation services and delivery of HKCs.Delivery of a HKC at an earlier age would give more time
to intervene early in a child ’s development, but primary
vaccinations are complete by 18 months, an age too soonfor accurate assessment of all aspects of a child ’s develop-
ment. Alternatively, instead of a single health assessment,
additional developmental assessments, not tied to vaccin-ation time-points, could be funded to take place in general
practice, in keeping with recommendations for a continu-
ous process of child surveillance. Annual assessments, forexample, would provide alternative surveillance opportun-
ities where families have prematurely disengaged from
MCHN services, although this could risk duplicating ser-vices. Alternatively, the co-location of MCHN services
within general practice may encourage opportunities for
child surveillance in some communities where access islimited [42]. Having a flexible delivery-model for child
health prevention is likely to be welcomed by families jug-
gling the demands of child-rearing when both parentswork, for example, and may help to overcome the barrier
of birth order (subsequent children are less likely than
first-borns to receive MCHN services) that we identifiedin a parallel parent study [17]. Flexible service delivery
models were also one factor that contributed to increasing
vaccination rates from 53% to more than 90% in the 1990s[43]. In addition, this would send a strong message about
the importance of early intervention to both parents and
practitioners, with the potential for general practice to sig-nificantly contribute towards developmental surveillance.
Recommendations designed to overcome other environ-
mental barriers could include the promotion and fundingof developmental screening tools suited to the time
constraints of primary care services, provision, in paper-
format, of health promotion literature, and support for
IT tools and equipment that promote the implementa-
tion of HKCs.
A major motivator for practitioners was their belief
about the consequences of preventive healthcare for young
children. Practitioners ’testimonies suggested that the avail-
ability, or otherwise, of refe rral services could enhance or
constrain participation in preventive health, and pre-
determined referral pathways clearly increased PNs ’
confi-
dence to administer HKCs. Dissemination of information
about local healthcare services, costs and availability, would
reduce the considerable individual effort required by prac-titioners to establish and maintain up-to-date resourceAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 11 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
repositories. The experience of a state-wide programme in
the US validates linkage of community resources with
practices, and was found to be essential for screening to beeffective [44].
The fact that the HKC had acted as a ‘catalyst ’to pro-
fessional development amongst some PNs and GPssuggests that some practitioners were poised to take on
an extended role in paediatric healthcare. In addition,
several GPs and PNs appeared amenable to practisingmore preventive healthcare and working alongside child-
hood educators and MCHNs. Primary care organisations
could provide the support for networks of professionals,from different disciplines in child preventive healthcare ,
to develop expertise ,share information, and build overall
capacity. As well as increasing opportunities for collab-orative care, this would also strengthen referral path-
ways. Precedent exists as similar collaborations have been
successfully implemented across disciplines in Australianprimary mental health care [45] with minimal central
funding and ongoing voluntary commitment from a broad
array of practitioners.
The barriers identified by this study are similar to those
uncovered elsewhere, with notable exceptions. Practi-
tioners were not deterred by inadequate reimbursementsfor providing HKCs, nor that they lacked the staff to con-
duct assessments. This may reflect important differences in
models of service delivery, as these were barriers expressedby primary care clinicians in the US [16,46], where regular
surveillance of children is strongly advocated, but delivered
primarily by family physicians and paediatricians, ratherthan MCHNs. In addition, practitioners did not discuss the
use of structured developmental assessments (which are
commonly utilised in the US [47]). Whilst practitionersthought that tools specific to primary care practice would
be useful, particularly when making assessments about so-
cial and emotional development, it was apparent that mostpractitioners were not aware of the various instruments
c u r r e n t l ya v a i l a b l et ot h e m .
Strengths and limitations
There were several limitations to this study. The TDF
was originally designed to be accessible and useful to aninterdisciplinary audience to understand behaviours
around evidence-based guidelines. The researchers had
a combined wealth of experience in general practice,preventive care, and qualitative research methods but
did not have access to the skills of a behavioural psych-
ologist. Had we had such access, further insights mayhave been generated, but in this way we have adhered to
the original intent of the TDF. Additionally, the fact that
preventive healthcare for children, including HKCs, isbased on low levels of evidence could have increased
the variation in behaviours, so that some discrepancies
m a yh a v eb e e nm i s s e d .T h e4 0p r a c t i t i o n e r sw h ot o o kpart in the focus groups were likely to be more moti-
vated towards prevention or paediatric health, and less
motivated practitioners may have additional deterrentsto providing preventive healthcare to young children.
This study was, however, purposefully aimed at practi-
tioners working in socio-economically diverse metropol-itan suburbs and captured a broad range of behaviours
around the provision of HKCs. Focus groups run the risk
of introducing bias resulting from an individual ’sd e s i r et o
conform to social acceptability, and their perceptions were
not actuality. Further studies, using a mix of quantitative
and alternative qualitative methods, could be done to ad-dress this, and could obtain the views of practitioners
from rural areas and other states where variations in
health structures and service delivery may produce differ-ent results [48]. The fact that common and significant
barriers were detected in this engaged group, however, im-
plies that larger gains are likely to be made where thestarting base is low. In addition, the participation rate for
the focus groups was adequate, and responses were gener-
ated in an iterative process that proceeded across each ofthe study areas with no new data relevant to the topic of
interest generated in the last of the six groups, suggest-
ing that saturation had been obtained. Moreover, feed-back, solicited from participants, did not amend the
study ’sf i n d i n g s .
Despite these limitations, there were considerable
strengths in this study. This was the first study to apply
the TDF to understand preventive healthcare in young
children and therefore adds to the body of work thatconstitutes knowledge translation research. Moreover,
the use of the COM-B model as an additional step in
the analysis increased the study ’s efficiency and proved
that the framework was adequate for purpose. An alterna-
tive method would have been to analyse the data within
the domains of the TDF as a single step. Previous researchhas used ‘relevance criteria ’to determine which domains
could be targeted by potential interventions [49]. In this
study, an unwieldy 11 of 12 domains would have had tobe considered, making subjective decisions necessary and
potentially causing important evidence to be disregarded.
Conclusions
Using an evidence-based methodology, we have shown
that while the barriers to delivery of preventive health-care and HKCs are considerable, opportunities do exist
for improvement. The TDF has generated an increased
awareness of the current situation and has clarified whichbarriers need to be targeted to improve implementation. As
discussed, many interventions could be applied during a
single programme, and a pragm atic approach needs to be
taken to ensure the ‘recipe for change ’contains the correct
‘measures ’and ‘timing, ’as well as the right ‘ingredients. ’The
design and mode of delivery of this complex interventionAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 12 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
will combine the findings from previous research with par-
ents [17] and discussion with a group of stakeholders, prior
to piloting and further te sting in general practice.
Endnotes
aChild health surveillance includes measuring growth
and promoting healthy weight, developmental assessments
including vision, hearing and social and emotional health,
assessments of oral health, injury prevention, and otherhealth promotion activities [50].
bThe original TDF was reviewed, modified and pub-
lished in 2012 [31], but because data was collected usingthe original framework (in 2011), analysis was made ac-
cording to this framework.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
DM conceived and co-supervised the study with BB, KA and BB facilitated
the focus groups and undertook data analysis, KA wrote the first draft of themanuscript, BB read and critically reviewed the manuscript and all authorsread and approved the final manuscript.
Authors ’information
Karyn E Alexander, PhD candidate, Department of General Practice, School ofPrimary Health Care, Monash University, Building 3, 270 Ferntree Gully Road,Notting Hill, Melbourne, Victoria 3168, Australia. Bianca Brijnath, NHMRC Early
Career Public Health Fellow, Department of General Practice, School of Primary
Health Care, Monash University, Building 1, 270 Ferntree Gully Rd, Notting Hill,Melbourne, Victoria 3168, Australia. Danielle Mazza, Head of Department,Department of General Practice, School of Primary Health Care, Monash University,
Building 1, 270 Ferntree Gully Rd, Notting Hill, Melbourne, Victoria 3168, Australia.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support received from the staff ofMedicare Locals and practices that facilitated recruitment, and the general
practitioners and practice nurses who took part in the focus groups.
Source of funding
This research was supported by a grant from the Shepherd Foundation,Malvern, Victoria, Australia. KA is funded by a Chris Silagy Scholarship from
the RACGP and BB is supported by a fellowship from the National Health
and Medical Research Council of Australia.
Author details
1Department of General Practice, School of Primary Health Care, Monash
University, Building 3, 270 Ferntree Gully Road, Notting Hill, Melbourne,Victoria 3168, Australia.
2NHMRC Early Career Public Health Fellow,
Department of General Practice, School of Primary Health Care, Monash
University, Building 1, 270 Ferntree Gully Rd, Notting Hill, Melbourne, Victoria
3168, Australia.3Department of General Practice, School of Primary Health
Care, Monash University, Building 1, 270 Ferntree Gully Rd, Notting Hill,Melbourne, Victoria 3168, Australia.
Received: 19 January 2014 Accepted: 20 May 2014
Published: 23 May 2014
References
1. National Preventative Health Taskforce: Australia: The Healthiest Country by
2020 –National Preventative Health Strategy –the Roadmap for Action.
Canberra: Commonwealth of Australia; 2009.
2. Government Australian: A National Health and Hospitals Network for
Australia ’s Future —Delivering Better Health and Better Hospitals. Canberra:
Commonwealth of Australia; 2010. http://www.nhpa.gov.au/internet/nhpa/publishing.nsf/Content/Healthy-communities (Accessed 5 Sep 2013).3. Council of Australian Governments: Investing in the Early Years: A National
Early Childhood Development Strategy. Canberra: Council of Australian
Governments; 2009.
4. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare: A picture of Australia ’s children
2012. Canberra: AIHW; 2012.
5. Chrisopoulos S, Harford JE: Oral Health and Dental Care in Australia: key Facts
and Figures 2012. Canberra: AIHW; 2013. Cat no DEN 224.
6. Australian Government: A Snapshot of Early Childhood Development in Australia
2012—AEDI National Report. Canberra: Australian Government; 2013.
7. Centre for Community Child Health- Royal Children ’s Hospital Melbourne:
Child Health Screening and Surveillance: A Critical Review of the Evidence ;
2002.
8. Moore T, Grove C: Best Practice Guidelines for Parental Involvement in
Monitoring and Assessing Young Children. Victorian Government: Department
of Education and Early Childhood Development; 2008.
9. Britt H, Miller GC, Charles J, Henderson J, Bayram C, Pan Y, Valenti L,
Harrison C, O ’Halloran J, Fahridin S: General Practice Activity in Australia
2009–10 General Practice Series no 27, Cat. no. GEP 27. Canberra: AIHW; 2010.
10. Healthy Kids Check –Fact Sheet. [http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/
publishing.nsf/Content/Health_Kids_Check_Factsheet_for_parents (Accessed5 Sep 2013)]
11. Britt H, Miller GC, Henderson J, Charles J, Valenti L, Harrison C, Bayram C,
Zhang C, Pollack AJ, O ’Halloran JYP: General Practice Activity in Australia
2011–12. General Practice Series no31. Sydney: Sydney University Press; 2012.
12. Medicare Item Reports ; [http://www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/statistics/
mbs_item.shtml (accessed 5 Sep 2013)]
13. Waters EB, Haby MM, Wake M, Salmon LA: Public health and preventive
healthcare in children: current practices of Victorian GPs and barriers toparticipation. Med J Aust 2000, 173:68–71.
14. Allen SG, Berry AD, Brewster JA, Chalasani RK, Mack PK: Enhancing
developmentally oriented primary care: an Illinois initiative to increase
developmental screening in medical homes. Pediatrics 2010, 126:S160 –S164.
15. Dosreis S, Weiner CL: Autism spectrum disorder screening and
management practices among general pediatric providers. J Dev Behav
Pediatr
2006, 27:S88 –S94.
16. Honigfeld L, McKay K: Barriers to enhancing practice-based
developmental services. J Dev Behav Pediatr 2006, 27:S30 –S33.
17. Alexander KE, Brijnath B, Mazza D: Parents ’decision-making and access to
preventive healthcare for young children: Applying Andersen ’s Model.
Article first published online. Health Expect 2013. doi:10.1111/hex.12100.
18. Angus D, Brouwers M, Driedger M, Eccles M, Francis J, Godin G, Graham I,
Grimshaw J, Hanna S, Harrison MB, Legare F, Lemyre L, Logan J, Martino R,
Pomey M, Tetroe J, IcebeRg: Designing theoretically-informed implemen-
tation interventions. The improved clinical effectiveness through Behav-ioural Research Group (ICEBeRG). Implement Sci 2006, 1:Article Number 4.
19. Michie S, Johnston M, Abraham C, Lawton R, Parker D, Walker A,
Psychological Theory G: Making psychological theory useful for
implementing evidence based practice: a consensus approach. Qual Saf
Health Care 2005, 14:26–33.
20. Eccles M, Grimshaw J, Walker A, Johnston M, Pitts N: Changing the
behavior of healthcare professionals: the use of theory in promoting the
uptake of research findings. J Clin Epidemiol 2005, 58:107 –112.
21. Campbell M, Fitzpatrick R, Haines A, Kinmonth AL, Sandercock P,
Spiegelhalter D, Tyrer P: Framework for design and evaluation of complex
interventions to improve health. Br Med J 2000, 321:694 –696.
22. Francis J, O ’Connor D, Curran J: Theories of behaviour change synthesised
into a set of theoretical groupings: introducing a thematic series on thetheoretical domains framework. Implement Sci 2012, 7:35.
23. Mazza D, Chapman A, Michie S: Barriers to the implementation of
preconception care guidelines as perceived by general practitioners: aqualitative study. BMC Health Serv Res 2013, 13:Article Number 73.
24. Boscart V, Fernie G, Lee J, Jaglal S: Using psychological theory to inform
methods to optimize the implementation of a hand hygiene intervention.
Implement Sci 2012, 7:77.
25. McSherry LA, Dombrowski SU, Francis JJ, Murphy J, Martin CM, O ’Leary JJ,
Sharp L, Grp A: ‘It’s a can of worms ’: understanding primary care
practitioners ’behaviours in relation to HPV using the theoretical
domains framework.
Implement Sci 2012, 7:Article Number 73.
26. Michie S: The Behaviour Change Wheel, Theoretical Domains Framework,
Behaviour Change Techniques. InKT Terminology Meeting. Ottawa, Canada:
Conference proceedings; 2012.Alexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 13 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
27. Kitzinger J: Qualitative Research- Introducing Focus Groups. Br Med J
1995, 311:299 –302.
28. Veitch C, Hollins J, Worley P, Mitchell G: General practice research.
Problems and solutions in participant recruitment and retention. Aust
Fam Physician 2001, 30:399 –406.
29. Braun V, Clarke V: Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual Res Psychol
2006, 3:77–101.
30. QSR International Pty Ltd: NVivo Qualitative Data Analysis Software. Version 8 ; 2008.
31. Cane J, O ’Connor D, Michie S: Validation of the theoretical domains
framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research.
Implement Sci 2012, 7:Article Number 38.
32. Healthy Start for School Fact Sheet. [http://www.dss.gov.au/our-responsibilities/
families-and-children/programs-services/healthy-start-for-school-fact-sheet
(Accessed 26 Sep 2013)]
33. Edvardsson K, Edvardsson D, Hornsten A: Raising issues about children ’s
overweight - maternal and child health nurses ’experiences. J Adv Nurs
2009, 65:2542 –2551.
34. Kuo AA, Inkelas M, Lotstein DS, Samson KM, Schor EL, Halfon N: Rethinking
well-child care in the United States: an international comparison.
Pediatrics 2006, 118:1692 –1702.
35. Alexander KE, Mazza D: The Healthy Kids Check - is it evidence-based?
Med J Aust 2010, 192:207 –210.
36. Jureidini J, Raven M: Healthy Kids Check: Lack of transparency and misplaced
f a i t hi nt h eb e n e f i t so fs c r e e n i n g . Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2012, 46:924 –927.
37. Guevara JP, Gerdes M, Localio R, Huang YV, Pinto-Martin J, Minkovitz CS,
Hsu D, Kyriakou L, Baglivo S, Kavanagh J, Pati S: Effectiveness of
developmental screening in an urban setting. Pediatrics 2013, 131:30–37.
38. Thomas SA, Cotton W, Pan X, Ratliff-Schaub K: Comparison of systematic
developmental surveillance with standardized developmental screening
in primary care. Clin Pediatr 2012, 51:154 –159.
39. Alexander KE, Brijnath B, Mazza D: ‘Can they really identify mental health
problems at the age of three? ’Parent and practitioner views about
screening young children ’s social and emotional development. Aust N Z J
Psychiatry 2013, 47:538 –545.
40. Melnyk BM, Grossman DC, Chou R, Mabry-Hernandez I, Nicholson W,
DeWitt TG, Cantu AG, Flores G: USPSTF perspective on evidence-based
preventive recommendations for children. Pediatrics 2012, 130:E399 –E407.
41. Davies PK: Divisions of General Practice: will they transform, or die? Med J
Aust 2010, 193:75–77.
42. Finally a System for Frontline Health Services. [http://amlalliance.com.au
(Accessed 8 Mar 2014)]
43. Kilham HBJ, Carrangis J, Harris M, Levy M, Nolan T, Ramm R, Sheridan J,
Sanders L, Johns M: National Immunisation Strategy. Canberra: National
Health and Medical Research Council; 1993.
44. Earls MF: Behavioral and developmental screening advice from ABCD
States ’experience. Pediatr Ann 2013, 42:266.
45. Mental Health Professionals Network. [http://www.mhpn.org.au/ (Accessed 26
Sep 2013)]
46. Mackrides PS, Ryherd SJ: Screening for developmental delay. Am Fam
Physician 2011, 84:544 –549.
47. King TM, Glascoe FP: Developmental surveillance of infants and young
children in pediatric primary care. Curr Opin Pediatr 2003, 15:624 –629.
48. Schmied V, Donovan J, Kruske S, Kemp L, Homer C, Fowler C:
Commonalities and challenges: A review of Australian state and territory
maternity and child health policies. Contemp Nurse 2011, 40:106 –117.
49. Duncan EM, Francis JJ, Johnston M, Davey P, Maxwell S, McKay GA, McLay J,
Ross S, Ryan C, Webb DJ, Bond C, Protect Study Grp: Learning curves,
taking instructions, and patient safety: using a theoretical domains
framework in an interview study to investigate prescribing errors among
trainee doctors. Implement Sci 2012, 7:Article Number 86.
50. Maternal and Child Health Service 10 Key Visits. [http://health.vic.gov.au/
mentalhealth/publications/caterpillar.pdf (Accessed 5 Sep 2013)]
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-9-60
Cite this article as: Alexander et al. :Barriers and enablers to delivery of the
Healthy Kids Check: an analysis inf ormed by the Theoretical Domains
Framework and COM-B model. Implementation Science 2014 9:60.Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitAlexander et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:60 Page 14 of 14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/60
