METHODOLOGY Open Access
Knowledge translation strategies to improve the
use of evidence in public health decision making
in local government: intervention design and
implementation plan
Rebecca Armstrong1*, Elizabeth Waters1, Maureen Dobbins2, Laurie Anderson3, Laurence Moore4, Mark Petticrew5,
Rachel Clark6, Tahna L Pettman1, Catherine Burns7, Marjorie Moodie8, Rebecca Conning1and Boyd Swinburn7
Abstract
Background: Knowledge translation strategies are an approach to increase the use of evidence within policy and
practice decision-making contexts. In clinical and health service contexts, knowledge translation strategies have
focused on individual behavior change, however the multi-system context of public health requires a multi-level,
multi-strategy approach. This paper describes the design of and implementation plan for a knowledge translation
intervention for public health decision making in local government.
Methods: Four preliminary research studies contributed findings to the design of the intervention: a systematic
review of knowledge translation intervention effectiveness research, a scoping study of knowledge translation
perspectives and relevant theory literature, a survey of the local government public health workforce, and a study
of the use of evidence-informed decision-making for public health in local government. A logic model was then
developed to represent the putative pathways between intervention inputs, processes, and outcomes operating
between individual-, organizational-, and system-level strategies. This formed the basis of the intervention plan.
Results: The systematic and scoping reviews identified that effective and promising strategies to increase access to
research evidence require an integrated intervention of skill development, access to a knowledge broker, resources
and tools for evidence-informed decision making, and networking for information sharing. Interviews and survey
analysis suggested that the intervention needs to operate at individual and organizational levels, comprising
workforce development, access to evidence, and regular contact with a knowledge broker to increase access to
intervention evidence; develop skills in appraisal and integration of evidence; strengthen networks; and explore
organizational factors to build organizational cultures receptive to embedding evidence in practice. The logic
model incorporated these inputs and strategies with a set of outcomes to measure the intervention ’s effectiveness
based on the theoretical frameworks, evaluation studies, and decision-maker experiences.
Conclusion: Documenting the design of and implementation plan for this knowledge translation intervention
provides a transparent, theoretical, and practical approach to a complex intervention. It provides significant insights
into how practitioners might engage with evidence in public health decision making. While this intervention model
was designed for the local government context, it is likely to be applicable and generalizable across sectors and
settings.
(Continued on next page)
* Correspondence: armr@unimelb.edu.au
1Jack Brockhoff Child Health and Wellbeing Program, McCaughey VicHealth
CentreMelbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of
Melbourne, Level 5/207 Bouverie Street, Carlton, Victoria, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2013 Armstrong et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Armstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
(Continued from previous page)
Trial registration: Australia New Zealand Clinical Trials Register ACTRN12609000953235.
Keywords: Knowledge translation, Evidence, Public health, Decision-making
Background
Evidence-informed decision-making (EIDM) involves in-
tegrating the best available research evidence with con-
textual factors including community preferences, local
issues ( e.g., health, social), political preferences, and pub-
lic health resources [1-3]. EIDM therefore considers re-
search evidence as one form of a range of sources of
evidence that are used to inform policy and practice
[2,4]. EIDM can be applied in a range of decision-making
contexts (including policy development, implementation,
and evaluation [5]). The benefits of EIDM include adop-
tion of the most effective and cost-efficient interventions
[6], minimized harm to people and communities [7-9],
and better health outcomes for individuals and communi-
ties [10-12].
However, in order for EIDM to operate efficiently and
effectively, a series of mechanisms are required: research
evidence needs to be conceptualized, conducted, and
communicated in a way that is meaningful to decision
makers [13,14]; research evidence needs to be accessed,
assessed, and appropriately applied [15] by decision ma-
kers within a complex political system; and researchers
and decision makers need to work in partnership to fund
and conduct research that addresses key policy questions.
It is clear that decision makers are under increasing pres-
sure to ensure their decisions are ‘evidence-based ’[16,17]
but significant barriers have been identified. These include
absence of personal contact between researchers and pol-
icy makers and practitioners, lack of time and resources,
organizational structures, and decision-making processes,
timeliness of research, poor quality or limited availability
of research, poor reporting of research, and political influ-
ence [13,15,18-20].
To address these barriers, a range of strategies, often
conceptualized as knowledge translation (KT), have been
developed, described, and in some instances, imple-
mented, particularly in clinical and health services con-
texts. KT is informed by and builds upon conceptual
understandings of the translation of research into practice,
for which key theories include diffusion, dissemination,
and implementation. Diffusion efforts are generally passive
while dissemination is a more active strategy to promote
the spread of particular ideas [21]. Implementation refers
to systematic efforts to encourage adoption of evidence
and knowledge by overcoming barriers [22]. This article is
concerned with KT strategies that seek to support imple-
mentation and describes an approach to the implementa-
tion of KT strategies within local governments (LGs). KTstrategies range between researcher-focused interventions
(to support the dissemination of research findings), deci-
sion maker-focused interventions (to change practices and
behaviors related to the integration of research evidence
into decision-making processes), and interventions de-
signed to create partnerships between researchers and de-
cision makers (where questions of mutual interest are
identified, research is conducted in partnership, and the
research is used to inform policy-level decisions) [23].
Despite the interest and advocacy for KT activities,
there has been limited evaluation of their impact on re-
search use in practice and policy and ultimately, EIDM
in public health. The implementation of KT strategies to
date has tended to focus on individual behavior change
of decision makers ( e.g., improving access to research to
ensure decision makers know where and how to access
it) [24]. However, it is increasingly acknowledged that
strategies to boost user capacity to access and use re-
search will have limited effect unless organizational and
system-wide barriers are addressed [15], where the reach
goes beyond individuals. This particularly likely to be
the case in public health where support systems are
often not available [25], for example EIDM processes are
generally not institutionalized within organizational pro-
cesses. There are also likely to be staff from diverse pro-
fessional backgrounds and as a result varying levels of
skill and confidence in EIDM.
Given the distinct need for further intervention re-
search examining the effectiveness of KT strategies for
public health decision-making, we explored the interest
of the LG sector. There was strong support for partici-
pating in an intervention to explore the effectiveness of
KT strategies. The KT intervention, named Knowledge
Translation for Local Government or ‘KT4LG, ’was de-
veloped with the 79 LG locations and implemented
within the research context of an exploratory cluster
randomized controlled trial. The evaluation of this in-
tervention represents a KT implementation study and
was registered with the international clinical trials por-
tal (Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Register
ACTRN12609000953235). The study protocol for the
design and methods for the mixed method evaluation
was published prior to commencement [26].
The KT4LG intervention aimed to increase the use of
research evidence to support EIDM for public health in
LGs. The purpose of this paper is to describe the design
of, and implementation plan for, the intervention. We
conducted four preliminary studies to produce findingsArmstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 2 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
to contribute into the development of the logic model.
The studies aimed to explore:
1. What KT strategies are described in the literature in
public health and more broadly and what do we
know about their effectiveness?
2. What types of evidence are used by Victorian LGs,
and how is it used within the context of decision
making?
3. What KT strategies are most applicable to Victorian
LGs to support EIDM?
A program logic was developed from findings of these
studies to articulate and describe the intervention compo-
nents, intended outcomes of the intervention, and possibleevolutions at organizational- and system-levels [27].
Context
In Australia, LGs represent the third tier of government
and are responsible for community-level issues, controlled
by Acts of state or territory parliaments. Broadly, their re-sponsibilities include: planning and building; roads and
parking; health services (for example, food safety, preven-
tion of spread of infectious disease); people services (forexample, maternal and child health); waste management;
animal management; recreation and culture; and local
laws [28]. The political and geographical context for thisstudy is Victoria Australia, where state-level legislation re-
quires LGs (councils) to have an evidence-based municipal
public health plan [29]. Section five of the Act states thatdecisions should be based on the best available evidence
to ensure effective and efficient use of resources. Obesity
prevention was selected as the public health topic for thestudy, harnessing the capacity of LGs to intervene by af-
fecting policy and regulatory change in food and physical
activity environments [30,31] and enabling illustration ofthe KT program components in the context of a national
health priority area. Through broader socio-environmen-
tal determinants, obesity prevention is an indirect priorityarea within LGs, with many councils working on food
security, open space for physical activity, and public
transport connections ( e.g., [32,33]) More recently, LGs
in Australia have assumed key responsibilities for healthy
eating and physical activity implementation through
nationally-funded grants (http://www.healthyactive.gov.au/internet/healthyactive/publishing.nsf/Content/healthy-
communities). In this context, the KT intervention was
designed to address known barriers to research evidenceuptake and to identify strategies that are effective in im-
proving the degree to which research evidence is accessed,
assessed, adapted and applied by decision makers.
The purpose of this paper is to describe the design of
and implementation plan process for a KT intervention
for public health decision making in LGs (the KT4LGstudy). Documenting the design and implementation of
KT interventions is particularly important given that there
is limited research but increasing interest in the applica-tion of KT to public health.
Methods
This section describes the methods and provides a broad
overview of results of the studies that informed interven-
tion design and the implementation plan. This differsfrom a traditional methods section, but we feel it is im-
portant to document these studies to demonstrate their
impact on intervention design and implementation. Thesepreliminary studies included a review of theoretical and
narrative literature, a systematic review of the effects of
KT strategies [23]; a survey of LGs in Victoria, and a qua-litative study exploring decision-making processes in
Victorian LGs [5]. A concurrent triangulated design that
treated each component (or study) relatively equally wasapplied. Data from each study were therefore collected
concurrently, analyzed separately, then findings compared
and synthesized for interpretation [34]. This enabled infer-ences to be made about the overall potential for concep-
tualization, and application, of KT in public health decision
making in LGs.
Study 1a: literature review
To understand potential barriers and facilitators, typesof KT strategies and theoretical perspectives described
and applied in contexts relevant to public health decision-
making, we conducted a scoping review of the literature,including peer reviewed and grey literature. The search
comprised a range of electronic databases and online
sources (Medline, CINAHL, APAIS, PsychInfo, Web ofScience, Google, and Google Scholar). Search terms
included derivatives of translation, exchange, transfer,
utilization, mobilization, evidence-based, evidence infor-med, public health, diffusion of innovations, knowledge
management, decision making, policy. This provided insight
into how EIDM might occur in public health decision-making contexts, and revealed gaps in the literature par-
ticularly in relation to theoretical models to guide KT
intervention design.
Barriers to EIDM have been well documented, how-
ever the literature is primarily relevant to clinical and
health service decision-makers. Of relevance to publichealth, the available literature suggests that issues in-
clude an unsupportive culture, lack of experience in
assessing evidence, staff turnover, information overload,and lack of actionable messages [24]. Facilitators and in-
fluences have also been identified in the literature and
include discussion on the influences of policy and con-text and decision-making factors on the evidence-
informed process [4]. Understanding the barriers and
the internal and external decision-making contexts [35]Armstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 3 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
was crucial in mapping the varying levels that KT inter-
ventions could operate. Research utilization theory de-
scribes types of evidence use: instrumental, conceptual,and symbolic [36-38]. The extent to which instrumental
use (the direct application of research) occurs or can be
measured in the policy context has been challenged [39].
The literature identified the broad range of interven-
tions characterized as supporting EIDM, albeit largely
applied in clinical and health service settings, includingstrategies that aim to push evidence towards decision
makers ( e.g., systematic reviews, clearinghouses), strat-
egies that aim to encourage decision makers to seek outevidence ( e.g., incentives and rewards, facilitation) and
strategies that aim to encourage the interaction between
researchers and decision makers ( e.g., communities of
practice, research partnerships). Studies with a focus
on KT conducted in clinical medicine and allied health
have traditionally focused on behavior change outcomes[40,41]. These are appropriate measures in these con-
texts where professional practice is overseen by clinical
guidelines and where action (for example, prescribing ortreatment choice) is more easily definable and measur-
able. However, public health decision-making is more
complex [42]. While evidence may be considered withinthe decision-making process, but it may be difficult to
identify its relative contribution to the final decision [39].
In order to determine an appropriate theoretical
framework for our intervention, it was necessary to seek
examples from the literature. Diffusion of innovations
theory has been applied to other KT research studies tohelp explore how ‘innovations ’or policy ideas spread
among individuals and organizations. Diffusion theory
is useful in helping to identify how innovations spreadwithin organizations, and in doing so is important in
identifying points at which strategies/interventions to in-
crease research use could be introduced. We also con-sidered the context and system within which LGs
operate, and the decision-making influences that exist
within these structures. Discussions within the literaturehave also recently highlighted the context for KT
recognising that diffusion and dissemination processes
and relationships are shaped and embedded through
structures [43-45].
Study 1b: systematic review
Systematic reviews are important syntheses of thecurrent state of best available evidence. They are also
valuable in terms of identifying research gaps [46]. Asystematic review of the effectiveness of KT interven-
tions for public health decision makers and managers
was conducted between 2009 and 2010. It is not possibleto report here the extensive methodology, however fur-
ther information has been reported elsewhere [23,44]
and is available from the authors on request. The resultsof the review confirmed our expectations that there is
limited evidence of the effectiveness of KT strategies in
public health settings [5,26]. At the time of the review,only one controlled study had been reported globally
[47], which found that targeted messages show potential
for increasing research utilization. The study exploredthe role and effectiveness of a knowledge-translation
intervention in 108 public health settings. The inter-
vention that was evaluated included three components(each a separate study arm): access to an online registry
of systematic reviews and associated summaries ( ‘web-
site’); website plus tailored messages; and website plus
tailored messages plus interaction with a knowledge bro-
ker (KB). The intervention duration was one year, and
the hypotheses were that public health departments ex-posed to tailored messages and KB would report greater
EIDM than those exposed to the website only. It was
found that tailored messages ‘pushed ’to the right indi-
viduals ( e.g., decision makers), in an organization that
was supportive of evidence use, led to positive outcomes.
The KB did not appear to be effective, but it was notedto be potentially useful where the culture for evidence
use was low. This may suggest a need for externally-
driven capacity building for individuals ( e.g., skills, confi-
dence), where the organizational culture is not supportive
of evidence use. In sum, the systematic review of inter-
national published and unpublished literature found onlyone study, and thus limited evidence to explain what
interventions facilitate evidence use in decision-making
processes; no published information from a LG context;and no literature from the Australian context.
Study 2: EviDenT: a statewide survey
Given the lack of literature describing public health en-
gagement with evidence and a lack of intervention design
to support EIDM within this context, the EviDenT (Evi-dence-informed Decision-making Tool) was developed to
survey LGs across the state of Victoria. Informed by previ-
ous tools [48,49], the EviDenT incorporated three core do-mains based on the findings from study one; access to
evidence, confidence in using evidence, and organizational
culture for EIDM. Other questions focused on EIDMskills, the use and influence of a range of sources of evi-
dence, and barriers and facilitators to EIDM. As will be
reported elsewhere, all LGs were invited to participate inthe survey and were asked to nominate up to four staff
members who worked in areas relevant to public health.
Analyses of the survey data (n = 135; response rate 75%)revealed emerging factors and strategies related to how
decisions were being made within LGs, and how influen-
tial evidence could be. Importantly, the survey also identi-fied potential KT strategies suggested by LG respondents
that may be useful in the LG context, including: strategies
to facilitate organizational change; improvements in accessArmstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 4 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
to evidence; and opportunities to participate in workforce
development to build skills in EIDM. These suggestions
would help to design the intervention. Improvements totime and resources available to practice EIDM were
highlighted, and training was frequently reported as ne-
cessary to support EIDM, for example to develop skills insearching for, appraising trustworthiness of, and applying
research evidence. Access to current research was identi-
fied, including access to research databases (which mostLGs did not subscribe to). Improvement of organizational
culture emerged, as evidence searching or review was not
considered to be a necessary function. Time and additio-nal resources were necessary to support EIDM in terms of
accessing and reading research and/or human resources
to perform this function. Respondents mentioned theneed for more accessible information (research evidence
summaries, regular bulletins, and cross-agency initiatives).
A thorough report of the results of the EviDenT surveywill be published elsewhere. A copy of the survey is avail-
able on request.
Study 3: qualitative study: mechanisms to support EIDM
Although EviDenT provided an understanding of the de-
gree of access, confidence, skills, and the influence and useof evidence across a sample of LGs in Victoria, it did not
address the individual experiences and contextual barriers
of evidence use and general decision-making processes. Aqualitative study using in-depth interviews was conducted
to explore the processes associated with EIDM in LGs. All
EviDenT participants were invited to participate in inter-views, 98 volunteered, 19 participants were selected, and
13 interviews were conducted. Interviewees were sampled
according to a matrix to ensure a mix of professional back-grounds ( e.g., health promotion, environmental health,
planning) and position titles ( e.g., CEO, managers, project
officers). The interviews were based on three core ques-tions on defining evidence, practising EIPH, and processes
for EIPH: how do you define evidence? Is this different
from how evidence is perceived in your organization?What are typical example/s of decisions and attempt to
track evidence-informed process?; What strategies would
support EIDM in your council? This final question encour-aged LGs to help to create the design of the intervention,
and as such the intervention was viewed very much as one
designed in partnership. Key themes emerged related todefining evidence, how evidence was being used generally,
and contextual influences upon evidence use. Thematic
analysis identified potential strategies that would be mostuseful to facilitate EIDM in the contexts of participants
interviewed. These are described below.
Skills development training
Training sessions targeted to both project officers and
senior management were highlighted as a key strategy tosupport EIDM. Suggested content included how to ac-
cess research evidence, updates on current intervention
research, and the research process (to support under-standing of how information gathering in a LG context
could or should occur). Frequency and duration of train-
ing was discussed, as turnover in LG staff would preventone-off workforce development sessions from impacting
on EIDM. Search skills for accessing evidence were
called for given the variability in familiarity with Internetrepositories between individuals.
Resources and tools for decision making
Tools to support EIDM were proposed, reflecting a need
to support understanding in assessing trustworthiness of
evidence, and applying evidence to decision making; aswas guidance on where evidence could be used in the
stages of decision-making processes, how different sources
of evidence can be combined, and access to tailored re-sources, such as evidence summaries.
Networking for information sharing
A range of networks already existed that supported LGstaff, however networks with external input ( e.g., other
government agencies, academics) were considered to be
more useful in promoting evidence sharing. The seniority
of individuals attending networking opportunities also ap-peared to be a consideration if networking was to be a KT
strategy. Support from senior management was recog-
nized as important to ensure networking opportunitiesdrive action. Participants acknowledged the importance of
relationships with researchers, although the relevance of
research and understanding of LGs purpose and contextfor evidence use needed to be understood. Access to ex-
ternal support was perceived to be potentially useful (in-
cluding assisting with access and making sense of researchevidence). This may also facilitate skill development.
Development of an intervention logic model
The preliminary studies described above informed thedevelopment of a logic model (see Figure 1), which iden-tifies the processes and pathways by which the multi-
strategy KT would be implemented. A logic model is a
depiction of a system within which an intervention fitsand identifies core elements and relationships that oper-
ate within that system. Logic models have been applied
to programs and interventions to identify how theymight work and how problems may be solved. Logic
models make explicit the underlying components of a
program and any underlying assumptions [50-53].
The logic model for KT4LG was underpinned by diffu-
sion of innovations theory. Diffusion of Innovations theory
was used to identify the points at which a KT interventionArmstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 5 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
could facilitate EIDM [21,54,55]. It was also used to ex-
plore how ideas are shared (at process and outcome level).
In addition, knowledge management theory and re-
search utilization theory were applied to provide perspec-
tives on how evidence may be used in an organizational
context [56-59].
KT frameworks (often based on diffusion of innova-
tions theory) were also used to inform the intervention
design. In particular, the framework developed by Bowen
and Zwi describes the importance of policy processes,
such as the policies influencing current planning within
LGs, and the ways in which evidence can be sourced,
used, and applied [4]. Given the absence of documented
organizational factors such as decision-making influ-
ences, staff capacity and strengths, and the sheer vari-
ability in organizational and geographical location, it was
envisaged that KT4LG needed to commence with engage-
ment of individuals within the organizations to identify
the most potent organizational- and system-level require-
ments for organizational change.
Results and discussion
Intervention aims
We integrated the findings from the preliminary re-
search studies (Figure 2) to inform the intervention de-
sign and associated implementation plan. Given that
previous KT intervention research has tested strategies
such as an online repository of public health evidence
(health-evidence.ca [60]) and knowledge brokering [61],
and given the strong preference for support strategies
and workforce development [62,63], a multi-strategy KT
capacity building intervention was proposed.The overall aims of the intervention were:
1. To increase access to research evidence through
provision of evidence summaries and additional
individualized support, such as tailored messages.
2. To develop skills in accessing research, assessing
trustworthiness, and applying research evidence to
local context.
3. To develop and implement strategies that assist in
the development of an organizational culture that
supports EIDM within LGs.
Figure 1 represents the logic model developed to de-
scribe intervention design and to guide the implementa-
tion plan. Based on the findings of the preliminary studies,
the intervention would comprise three core components:
tailored organizational support, group training, and targeted
Figure 1 Logic model: KT intervention for LG.
Figure 2 Preliminary studies and their contribution to
intervention design.Armstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 6 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
messages and evidence summaries. All comparison councils
would have access to the evidence summaries.
Intervention implementation
The components of the intervention were integrated and
delivered continuously across two years, based on reflec-tions from previous research for a longer implementation
period [47].
The intervention was designed to be implemented by a
Program Coordinator (RCl and then subsequently TP),
who would also provide a point-of-contact and act as a
KB. The term ‘program ’was used as it was deemed more
appropriate for use with the target population. While the
overall priority content area was obesity prevention, the
intervention and skills required of the Program Coordin-ator needed to be wider in order to meet the demands of
public health practitioners in the LG sector. Given the
variation in LG size, the numbers of invited participantsfrom each council would vary but were limited to four.
Tailored organizational support
Monthly one-on-one contact with staff in councils would
occur via telephone, initiated by the Program Coordinator.
This could be more or less frequent depending on partici-pant needs. Phone calls will focus on public health related
projects, ideally with a focus on obesity prevention. The
Program Coordinator planned to identify how evidencecould be further incorporated at various stages of the pro-
gram planning, implementation, and evaluation cycle. Bar-
riers and facilitators to EIDM will be discussed in order toprovide the Program Coordinator with information to
tailor support. Assessment of need for tailored support
would be conducted at the initial and mid-interventionvisits.
The preliminary studies and review of theoretical per-
spectives recommended the inclusion of site visits,highlighting the potential usefulness of enhanced inter-
action between researchers/knowledge brokers and the
individuals/agencies. A mid-term site visit was thereforeproposed for each LG. The objectives of the visits would
be agreed mutually by the LG and Program Coordinator,
and could include activities such as group training,working meetings, or presentations. Site visits may also
be used to discuss individual and organizational culture
for use of research evidence among the public healthteam, guided by self-assessment tools developed and
evaluated by the Canadian Health Services Research
Foundation [64,65]. Strategies to address organizationalevidence use were an exploratory component of the
intervention.
Group training
Group training would be held biannually in a central lo-
cation. A modular approach was planned to cover coreprinciples of evidence-informed public health asking an-
swerable questions, searching, trustworthiness, assessing
applicability and transferability, and evaluation; with arange of activities designed to encourage networking
between councils. It was anticipated that participants
would contribute to the focus of these sessions. Shareddevelopment of the logic model identified the need for
networking sessions, which would be incorporated into
the group training sessions rather than run separately asit was felt that LG staff may already be participants in
formal networks and additional networks may prove too
time consuming.
Mid-intervention council visits would be used to exam-
ine the fidelity of the intervention, and to assess the con-
text of EIDM within each council. Council-based trainingwould be offered once, at the mid-point of the interven-
tion, as a mechanism to engage a wider audience (increase
within-council reach) and to meet the needs of the coun-cil, particularly if geographic distance is a barrier to regu-
lar attendance at central training sessions.
Targeted communication and evidence summaries
Evidence summaries, outlining possible obesity preven-
tion intervention options, were to be developed in part-
nership with participants and other LG contacts across
Australia. Legislative requirements of councils would beexplored and considered, and relevance to the role of
councils in service delivery and program implemen-
tation incorporated. The Program Coordinator wouldwork in partnership with councils to develop these doc-
uments prior to distributio n to ensure appropriateness
and relevance of content. Evidence summaries would beavailable to all LGs. These summaries would be used to
promote evidence-informed options within intervention
LGs. In addition, the Program Coordinator would sendintervention LGs targeted communication that may in-
clude newly published studies or reviews, and upcoming
conferences and training opportunities.
Intervention outcomes
As the logic model proposes, a range of outcomes wouldbe possible at the individual-, organizational-, and
system-levels. The KT4LG intervention study [66] sought
to measure the impact of the KT intervention on individ-uals’confidence, skills, and access to research evidence
compared to a control group not receiving the same inter-
vention. Further, KT4LG attempted to assess changes inthe organizational culture for EIDM, with the expectation
that if this occurs, then research use (instrumental and
conceptual) would increase among public health teams,which ultimately could be expected to increase research
use across the organization and the system within which
LG operates.Armstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 7 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
Limitations
The design of the intervention is limited primarily to the
implementation of KT interventions targeted at individ-uals. The logic model demonstrates how individual inter-
ventions may be linked to organizational- and system-level
interventions. Given the paucity of literature on interven-tions directed at these levels with the intent of increasing
organizational culture we will explore potential strategies
during the implementation of KT4LG.
The size and scope of LG was identified as an issue for
the implementation of KT4LG in the preliminary studies —
particularly the qualitative study. It was anticipated thatparticipating in this intervention might be more challen-
ging for LGs with smaller staffing levels, smaller budgets,
and/or limited research capacity.
The design of KT4LG revealed the challenges in meas-
uring outcomes at both individual-, organizational-, and
system-levels. Based on the results of the preliminarystudies the research team chose to focus on three core
domains: access, confidence, and organizational culture.
There was limited evidence on which to base this deci-sion. The implementation and evaluation of KT4LG will
reveal more about the usefulness of these domains.
Conclusions
KT4LG aims to respond to the lack of rigorous evidence
to guide KT in public health decision-making contexts.Preliminary research informing the intervention included
a review of theoretical and narrative literature, a system-
atic review of the effects of KT strategies, a survey of LGsin Victoria, and a qualitative study exploring decision-
making processes in this setting. The KT4LG intervention
was designed using a partnership approach and involvedan international research team interested in the develop-
ment and mixed method evaluation of innovative and
evidence-based complex interventions and practitioners inLG public health. As such, KT4LG aimed to co-generate
new, practical evidence on what works to support EIDM
in the LG context. The intervention design was informedby diffusion of innovations theory, research utilization the-
ory, and KT frameworks. The intervention outlined in the
logic model was designed to address contemporary de-mands including: imposed policy expectations for the use
of evidence in policy and planning; organizational de-
mands for best available evidence; identification of factorsfor system-wide solutions; opportunities to embed KT com-
petencies into planning and employment; the need for in-
creased access to relevant research; skills to interpret anduse research; and network building. Guided by the over-
arching logic model, intervention components included
selection of participants involved in key public healthdecision-making contexts, group training and networking
sessions, monthly contact with a Program Coordinator,
and relevant evidence summaries.The interest in ‘what works for whom and why ’about
public health issues such as obesity prevention while ad-
dressing trustworthiness and relevance of research evi-dence, is compelling and a great drawcard for a new,
realistic approach to public health research and evidence-
informed public health in particular. Answering questionsof relevance and priority can help bridge the evidence-
practice gap. KT4LG is an example of a facilitated KT
intervention that presents an approach designed to in-crease the use of research evidence in policy and practice.
Abbreviations
APAIS: Australian public affairs information service; CINAHL: Cumulative index to
nursing and allied health literature; EIDM: Evidence-informed decision-making;
KB: Knowledge broker; KT: Knowledge translation; KT4LG: Knowledge translation
for local government; LG: Local government.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
All authors were actively involved in the development and design of theintervention and study. RA drafted the initial manuscript. EW is the principalChief Investigator and led the study, RA was the project manager, RCl and
TP coordinated intervention activities and in this capacity RCl contributed to
the logic model development. All authors contributed to the draft of thispaper and signed off on the final version.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the Victorian LGs who participated in thepreliminary studies and who contributed to the design of KT4LG. Theauthors wish to acknowledge the National Health and Medical Research
Council who funded this study, the Brockhoff Foundation who contribute to
the Jack Brockhoff Child Health and Wellbeing Program and the VictorianHealth Promotion Foundation (VicHealth) who provided office space for thestudy team.
Author details
1Jack Brockhoff Child Health and Wellbeing Program, McCaughey VicHealth
CentreMelbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of
Melbourne, Level 5/207 Bouverie Street, Carlton, Victoria, Australia.2School of
Nursing, McMaster University, Main Street West, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
3Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of
Washington, Seattle, USA.4Cardiff Institute of Society and Health, School of
Social Sciences, Cardiff University, 1-3 Museum Place, Cardiff, Wales, UK.
5London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, University of London,
Keppel St, London, UK.6The Center of Excellence in Intervention and
Prevention Science, Melbourne, Australia.7Population Health Strategic
Research, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Burwood, Victoria,
Australia.8Deakin Health Economics, School of Health and Social
Development, Deakin University, Burwood Highway, Burwood, Victoria,Australia.
Received: 13 December 2012 Accepted: 18 September 2013
Published: 9 October 2013
References
1. National Collaborating Centre for Methods and Tools: A Model for Evidence-
Informed Decision-Making in Public Health. [fact sheet] ; 2012. Retrieved from
http://www.nccmt.ca/pubs/FactSheet_EIDM_EN_WEB.pdf.
2. Brownson RC, Fielding JE, Maylahn CM: Evidence-based public health: a
fundamental concept for public health practice. Annu Rev Public Health
2009, 30:175 –201.
3. Nutley S, Walter I, Davies H: From knowing to doing: a framework for
understanding the evidence into practice agenda. Eval Program Plann
2003, 9:125 –148.
4. Bowen S, Zwi AB: Pathways to “evidence-informed ”policy and practice: a
framework for action. PLoS Med 2005, 2:e166.Armstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 8 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
5. Oxman AD, Lavis JN, Fretheim A, Lewin S: SUPPORT tools for evidence-
informed health policymaking (STP )1 7 :d e a l i n gw i t hi n s u f f i c i e n t
research evidence. Health Res Policy Syst 2009, 7(Suppl 1):S17.
6. Lavis JN, Wilson MG, Oxman AD, Lewin S, Fretheim A: SUPPORT tools for
evidence-informed health policymaking (STP) 4: using research evidence
to clarify a problem. Health Res Policy Syst 2009, 7(Suppl 1):S4.
7. Macintyre S, Petticrew M: Good intentions and received wisdom are not
enough. J Epidemiol Community Health 2000, 54:802 –803.
8. Chalmers I: Trying to do more good than harm in policy and practice:
the role of rigorous, transparent, up-to-date evaluations. Ann Am Acad
Pol Soc Sci 2003, 589:22–40.
9. Chalmers I: If evidence-informed policy works in practice, does it matter
if it doesn ’t work in theory? Evid Policy: A J Res, Debate Pract 2005,
1:227 –242.
10. Canadian Institutes of Health Research: Knowledge translation strategy
2004—2009: Innovation in action. Ottawa, ON: Canadian Institutes of
Health Research; 2004.
11. Task Force on Health Systems Research: Informed choices for attaining the
millennium development goals: towards an international cooperative
agenda for health systems research. Lancet 2004, 364:997 –1003.
12. Banks G: Evidence-based policy-making: What is it? How do we get it? ANU
Public Lecture Series, presented by ANZSOG. Canberra: COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA; 2008.
13. Petticrew M, Whitehead M, Macintyre SJ, Graham H, Egan M: Evidence for
public health policy on inequalities: 1: the reality according topolicymakers. J Epidemiol Community Health 2004, 58:811 –816.
14. Davies HTO, Nutley SM: Evidence-based policy and practice: moving from
rhetoric to reality. Third International, Inter-disciplinary Evidence-Based
Policies and Indicator Systems Conference, Centre for Public Policy andManagement, University of St Andrews; 2001.
15. Bowen S, Erickson T, Martens PJ, Crockett S: More than “Using Research ”:
the real challenges in promoting evidence-informed decision-making.Healthc Policy 2009, 4:87–102.
16. Hanney S, Gonzalez-Block M, Buxton M, Kogan M: The utilisation of health
research in policy-making: concepts, examples and methods of
assessment. Health Res Policy Syst 2003,
1:2.
17. Davies HTO, Nutley SM, Walter I: Assessing the impact of social science
research: conceptual, methodological and practical issues: a background
discussion paper. UK: Research Unit for Research Utilization, School of
Management, University of St Andrews; 2005.
18. Innvaer S, Vist G, Trommald M, Oxman A: Health policy-makers ’
perceptions of their use of evidence: a systematic review. J Health Serv
Res Policy 2002, 7:239 –244.
19. Elliott H, Popay J: How are policy makers using evidence? Models of
research utilisation and local NHS policy making. J Epidemiol Community
Health 2000, 54:461 –468.
20. Armstrong R, Waters E, Moore L, Riggs E, Cuervo LG, Lumbiganon P, Hawe
P:Improving the reporting of public health intervention research:
advancing TREND and CONSORT. J Public Health (Oxf) 2008, 30:103 –109.
21. Rogers EM: Diffusion of Innovations. New York: The Free Press; 1962.
22. Tetroe JM, Graham ID, Foy R, Robinson N, Eccles MP, Wensing M, Durieux P,
Legare F, Nielson CP, Adily A, et al:Health research funding agencies ’
support and promotion of knowledge translation: an international study.Milbank Q 2008, 86:125 –155.
23. Armstrong R, Waters E, Dobbins M, Lavis John N, Petticrew M, Christensen
R:Knowledge translation strategies for facilitating evidence-informed
public health decision making among managers and policy-makers.Cochrane Database Syst Rev (protocol) 2011. 10.1002/14651858.CD009181.
24. Mitton C, Adair CE, McKenzie E, Patten SB, Waye PB: Knowledge transfer
and exchange: review and synthesis of the literature. Milbank Q 2007,
85:729 –768.
25. Wandersman A, Duffy J, Flaspohler P, Noonan R, Lubell K, Stillman L,
Blachman M, Dunville R, Saul J: Bridging the gap between prevention
research and practice: the interactive systems framework for
dissemination and implementation. Am J Community Psychol 2008,
41:171 –181.
26. Waters E, Armstrong R, Swinburn B, Moore L, Dobbins M, Anderson L,
Petticrew M, Clark R, Conning R, Moodie M, Carter R: An exploratory cluster
randomised controlled trial of knowledge translation strategies to support
evidence-informed decision-making in local governments (The KT4LG study).
BMC Public Health 2011, 11:34.27. Hawe P, Shiell A, Riley T: Theorising interventions as events in systems.
Am J Community Psychol 2009, 43:267 –276.
28. Department of Planning and Community Developmen: Guide to Local
Government ; 2013. Retrieved October 2013, from http://www.dpcd.vic.gov.
au/localgovernment/guide-to-local-government.
29. Parliament of Victoria: Public Health and Wellbeing Act 2008. Parliament of
Victoria; 2008.
30. Allender S, Gleeson E, Crammond B, Sacks G, Lawrence M, Peeters A, Loff B,
Swinburn B: Moving beyond ‘rates, roads and rubbish ’: how do local
governments make choices about healthy public policy to preventobesity? Aust N Z Health Policy 2009, 6:20.
31. Campbell S, Benita S, Coates E, Davies P, Penn G: Analysis for policy:
evidence-based policy in practice. UK: Government Social Research Unit; 2007.
32. Victorian Health Promotion Foundation (VicHealth): Food for All program
2005–10: Evaluation report. Melbourne: VicHealth; 2011.
33. The Department of Planning and Community Development: Transport
Connections Program ; 2012. Retrieved 13 Dec 2012, from http://www.rdv.vic.
gov.au/community-programs/transport-connections.
34. Creswell J, Plano Clark V, Gutmann M, Hanson W: Advanced mixed
methods research designs. InHandbook of mixed methods in social and
behavioural research. Edited by Tashakkori A, Teddlie C. California: Sage
Publications; 2003.
35. Dobrow MJ, Goel V, Lemieux-Charles L, Black NA: The impact of context on
evidence utilization: a framework for expert groups developing health
policy recommendations. Soc Sci Med 2006, 63:1811 –1824.
36. Estabrooks C: The conceptual structure of research utilization. Res Nurs
Health 1999, 22:203 –216.
37. Amara N, Ouimet M, Laundry R: New evidence on instrumental,
conceptual and symbolic utilization of university research in
government agencies. Sci Commun 2004, 26:75–106.
38. Lavis JN, Ross SE, Hurley JE, Hohenadel JM, Stoddart GL, Woodward CA,
Abelson J: Examining the role of health services research in public
policymaking. Milbank Q 2002, 80:125 –154.
39. Petticrew M, Platt S, McCollam A, Wilson S, Thomas S: “We ’re not short of
people telling us what the problems are. We ’re short of people telling
us what to do ”: an appraisal of public policy and mental health.
BMC Public Health 2008, 8:314.
40. Grimshaw JM, Shirran L, Thomas R, Mowatt G, Fraser C, Bero L, Grilli R,
Harvey E, Oxman A, O ’Brien MA: Changing provider behavior: an
overview of systematic reviews of interventions. Med Care
2001,
39:II2–II45.
41. Bero LA, Grilli R, Grimshaw JM, Harvey E, Oxman AD, Thomson MA: Closing
the gap between research and practice: an overview of systematic
reviews of interventions to promote the implementation of researchfindings. The Cochrane effective practice and organization of carereview group. Br Med J 1998, 317:465 –468.
42. Kohatsu ND, Robinson JG, Torner JC: Evidence-based public health: an
evolving concept. Am J Prev Med 2004, 27:417 –421.
43. Orton L, Lloyd-Williams F, Taylor-Robinson D, O ’Flaherty M, Capewell S: The
use of research evidence in public health decision making processes:systematic review. PLoS One 2011, 6:e21704.
44. Armstrong R: Evidence-informed public health decision-making in local
government , PhD Thesis. University of Melbourne, Melbourne School of
Public Health; 2011. http://repository.unimelb.edu.au/10187/9684.
45. Best A, Moor G, Holmes B, Clark PI, Bruce T, Leischow S, Buchholz K, Krajnak J:
Health promotion dissemination and systems thinking: towards an
integrative model. Am J Health Behav 2003, 27:S206 –S216.
46. Higgins J, Green S: Cochrane handbook for systematic reviews of
interventions. InThe Cochrane Library. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons,
Ltd; 2006.
47. Dobbins M, Hanna S, Ciliska D, Manske S, Cameron R, Mercer S, O ’Mara L,
DeCorby K, Robeson P: A randomized controlled trial evaluating the
impact of knowledge translation and exchange strategies. Implement Sci
2009, 4:61.
48. Dobbins M: Knowledge Translation and Exchange Questionnaire. Canadian
Institute for Health Research: Canada; 2004.
49. Weatherly H, Drummond M, Smith D: Using evidence in the development
of local health policies. Some evidence from the United Kingdom.Int J Technol Assess Health Care 2002, 18:771 –781.
50. Bickman L: The functions of program theory. New Directions for Program
Evaluation 1987, 1987 (33):5 –18.Armstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 9 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
51. Frechtling J: Logic modeling methods in program evaluation. San Francisco:
John Wiley and Sons; 2007.
52. Millar A, Simeone RS, Carnevale JT: Logic models: a systems tool for
performance management. Eval Program Plann 2001, 24:73–81.
53. Anderson LM, Petticrew M, Rehfuess E, Armstrong R, Ueffing E, Baker P,
Francis D, Tugwell P: Using logic models to capture complexity in
systematic reviews. Res Synth Methods 2011, 2:33–42.
54. Dearing JW: Applying diffusion of innovation theory to intervention
development. Res Soc Work Pract 2009, 19:503 –518.
55. Green LW, Ottoson JM, García C, Hiatt RA: Diffusion theory and knowledge
dissemination, utilization, and integration in public health. Annu Rev Public
Health 2009, 30(1):151 –174.
56. Weiss C: The many meanings of research utilization. Public Adm Rev
1979 :426 –431.
57. Beyer JM: Research utilization: bridging the gap between communities.
J Manag Inq 1997, 6(17-22).
58. Hanney SR, Gonzalez-Block M, Buxton MJ, Kogan M: The utilization of
health services research in policy-making: concepts, examples and
methods of assessment. Health Res Policy Syst 2003, 1.
59. Nonaka I, Takeuchi H: The knowledge creating company: How Japanese
companies create the dynamics of innovation. Oxford: Oxford University
Press; 1995.
60. Dobbins M, DeCorby K, Robeson P, Husson H, Tirilis D, Greco L: Ak n o w l e d g e
management tool for public health: health-evidence.ca. BMC Public Health
2010, 10:496.
61. Dobbins M, Robeson P, Ciliska D, Hanna S, Cameron R, O ’Mara L, Decorby K,
Mercer S: A description of a knowledge broker role implemented as part
of a randomized controlled trial evaluating three knowledge translation
strategies. Implement Sci 2009, 4:23.
62. Baker EA, Brownson RC, Dreisinger M, McIntosh LD, Karamehic-Muratovic A:
Examining the role of training in evidence-based public health: a qualitative
study. Health Promot Pract 2009, 10:342 –348.
63. Eldredge JD, Carr R, Broudy D, Voorhees RE: The effect of training on
question formulation among public health practitioners: results from a
randomized controlled trial. J Med Libr Assoc 2008, 96:299.
64. Canadian Health Services Research Foundation: Is Research Working for You?
A Self-Assessment Tool and Discussion Guide for Health Services Management
and Policy Organizations. Ottawa, Ontario: Canadian Health Services
Research Foundation; 2005.
65. Kothari A, Edwards N, Hamel N, Judd M: Is research working for you?
Validating a tool to examine the capacity of health organizations to use
research. Implement Sci 2009, 4:46.
66. Waters E, Armstrong R, Swinburn B, Moore L, Dobbins M, Anderson L,
Petticrew M, Clark R, Conning R, Moodie M, Carter R: An exploratory cluster
randomised controlled trial of knowledge translation strategies to support
evidence-informed decision-making in local governments (The KT4LG study).
BMC Public Health 2011, 11.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-121
Cite this article as: Armstrong et al. :Knowledge translation strategies to
improve the use of evidence in public health decision making in local
government: intervention design and implementation plan.
Implementation Science 2013 8:121.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitArmstrong et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:121 Page 10 of 10
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/121
