RESEARCH Open Access
Using psychological theory to inform methods to
optimize the implementation of a hand hygiene
intervention
Veronique M Boscart1,2, Geoff R Fernie2,3, Jae H Lee2and Susan B Jaglal2,4*
Abstract
Background: Careful hand hygiene (HH) is the single most important factor in preventing the transmission of
infections to patients, but compliance is difficult to achieve and maintain. A lack of understanding of the processes
involved in changing staff behaviour may contribute to the failure to achieve success. The purpose of this study
was to identify nurses ’and administrators ’perceived barriers and facilitators to current HH practices and the
implementation of a new electronic monitoring technology for HH.
Methods: Ten key informant interviews (three administrators and seven nurses) were conducted to explore barriers
and facilitators related to HH and the impact of the new technology on outcomes. The semi structured interviews
were based on the Theoretical Domains Framework by Michie et al. and conducted prior to intervention
implementation. Data were explored using an inductive qualitative analysis approach. Data between administrators
and nurses were compared.
Results: In 9 of the 12 domains, nurses and administrators differed in their responses. Administrators believed that
nurses have insufficient knowledge and skills to perform HH, whereas the nurses were confident they had the
required knowledge and skills. Nurses focused on immediate consequences, whereas administrators highlighted
long-term outcomes of the system. Nurses concentrated foremost on their personal safety and their families ’safety
as a source of motivation to perform HH, whereas administrators identified professional commitment, incentives,
and goal setting. Administrators stated that the staff do not have the decision processes in place to judge whether
HH is necessary or not. They also highlighted the positive aspects of teams as a social influence, whereas nurses
were not interested in group conformity or being compared to others. Nurses described the importance of
individual feedback and self-monitoring in order to increase their performance, whereas administrators reported
different views.
Conclusions: This study highlights the benefits of using a structured approach based on psychological theory to
inform an implementation plan for a behavior change intervention. This work is an essential step towards
systematically identifying factors affecting nurses ’behaviour associated with HH.
Keywords: Hand hygiene, Knowledge translation, Compliance, Behaviour change, Electronic monitoring
* Correspondence: susan.jaglal@utoronto.ca
2Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada
4Department of Physical Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2012 Boscart et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
Background
Transmission of infections within healthcare institutions
presents a significant threat to the health of patients andstaff [1]. It has been estimated that there are 2 million
hospital-acquired infections (HAIs) per year globally,
affecting 10% of hospitalized patients [2,3]. In the UnitedStates, HAIs are estimated to cause 90,000 deaths annu-
ally and result in $5.7 billion in excess healthcare costs
[4,5]. In Canada, HAIs affect 220,000 patients, resultingin 8,000 deaths per year [6]. Most HAIs must be treated
with antibiotics, resulting in increases in antibiotic-
resistant organisms, lengthened hospital stays, additionalsurgical procedures, inefficiency in hospital systems, dis-
ability, and sometimes death.
Careful hand hygiene (HH) performed by healthcare
staff is the single most important factor in preventing
the transmission of pathogens [7-9]. Research has indi-
cated that up to 50% of HAIs could be avoided withimprovements in HH compliance [3,8,9]. Therefore, HH
is recommended as a routine best practice for all health-
care staff-patient interactions [3,8]. Several evidence-based guidelines and interventions have been developed
to enhance HH compliance,[10,11] and most healthcare
organizations have invested significant resources in thetraining and education of their staff. In spite of this,
improved compliance with HH guidelines is difficult to
achieve and maintain, partially because education alonedoes not translate into practice change in the demanding
clinical environments in which staff practice [9]. Mul-
tiple studies have documented HH compliance rates tobe suboptimal, with a mean observed rate of 40% [2,12].
To address this concerning lack of professional prac-
tice, a variety of promotional strategies and interventionshave been studied, yet none have demonstrated significant
sustained improvements in HH compliance [3,12-14].
Multimodal interventions, such as those that include bothproblem-based and task-oriented HH education, ongoing
HH audits, and HAI surveillance programs, do improve
HH compliance rates but have failed to be sustainablebecause they require substantial ongoing costs for educa-
tors, auditors, and administrators [13]. Rosenthal et al.
[15] reported an atypical improvement in HH compli-
ance as a result of an education, training, and perform-
ance feedback program, with an increase in compliancefrom 23% to 65%. The authors claimed a sustained im-
provement, yet significant ongoing effort in the form of
observation twice a week over an 18-month period wasused to maintain this change.
Given the current challenges to promote HH, an elec-
tronic monitoring system, reminding staff to wash theirhands when necessary, may facilitate compliance [16].
Swoboda et al. [17] evaluated an electronic monitoring
system using light beams and motion detectors at thethreshold of each room, with additional sensors detectingthe use of sinks, soap, and alcohol gel dispensers. A
voice-prompting system instructed the staff to wash their
hands if they had not done so before exiting the room.HH compliance improved by 41%, and infection rates
decreased by 48%; however, the authors concluded that
compliance was “at best, fair, even in a population of
professionals who understand the importance ”(p. 363).
No data were collected on staff ’s responses to being
monitored, nor on the acceptability of the system [17].
The limited impact of these described strategies and
interventions may be due in part to a failure to identify
those factors influencing staff ’s HH behavior and subse-
quent lack of incorporation of these findings into inter-
vention designs and the delivery of the intervention.
There is some research available indicating that severalbarriers and facilitators do influence HH compliance,
[3,12-14] yet this information has not been translated in
intervention design and implementation.
A new technology to enhance hand hygiene
A team of researchers has developed a novel technologythat allows electronic HH monitoring and prompting of
staff [18,19]. The system consists of individual worn
badges that communicate with sensors installed at roomentrances and hand wash stations throughout the unit.
Staff entering or leaving a room are prompted to wash
their hands if they have not done so previously. To thebest of the authors ’knowledge, no other systems with
similar capabilities currently exist. A pilot study explor-
ing the acceptability of this electronic monitoring system(EMS) indicated a favourable response by staff, [20] and
a larger study evaluating the efficacy of the system and
the sustainability of resulting improvements in HH com-pliance has been funded. Nurses on a 50-bed unit will be
using the EMS for 12 months, and qualitative and quan-
titative data will be collected. This novel technology hasthe potential to improve and sustain compliance beyond
what has been accomplished previously [21]. However,
as with any intervention aimed at changing profes-sionals ’behaviour, its effectiveness is sensitive to context
[22,23].
A clear understanding of why staff do or do not
change their individual behavior is essential in order to
guide intervention design [22,24]. More specifically, to
justify program implementation of the EMS, it will be ofcritical importance to understand the perceived barriers
and facilitators underlying individual nurses ’compliance.
Furthermore, this information is crucial to design furtherinterventions, disseminate results, and help governments
and others to integrate and update HH compliance stan-
dards and policies [25]. The purpose of this study wastherefore to explore barriers and facilitators to current
HH practices and the implementation of the EMS inter-
vention to improve HH practice from the perspective ofBoscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 2 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
nurses and administrators. Nurses represent the largest
proportion of healthcare staff that have direct contact
with patients and are, therefore, an important targetgroup of any HH intervention. The findings of this study
will be used to inform implementation of the EMS.
Methods
Design
A qualitative design using semi structured key informantinterviews was used to collect data. Key informant inter-
views consist of qualitative in-depth interviews from arange of people who have firsthand knowledge about the
phenomena in the practice setting. These experts, with
their particular knowledge and understanding, can pro-
vide insight on the nature of problems and give recom-
mendations for solutions. For this specific study, theauthors chose to involve the director of care, the unit
manager, an infection control specialist, and nurses as
key informants.
In determining the approach to gather the information
needed, the authors chose the Theoretical Domains
Framework (TDF) of behaviour change developed byMichie et al. , [26] as the domains aligned well with our
aim to explore barriers and facilitators of a HH behavior
change.
Setting and participants
Semi structured in-depth interviews were undertaken toidentify staff ’s perceived barriers and facilitators to
current HH practices and the implementation of the
EMS. All nursing staff employed on the interventionunit were invited to participate in the study. Inclusion
criteria included being a part-time or full-time employee
on the designated unit and providing direct care. Inaddition, the infection control specialist and the director
of care for the facility and the unit manager responsible
for the intervention unit were invited. All potential parti-cipants were contacted and received an information let-
ter about the study. If they agreed to receive more
information, one of the investigators (VMB) met withthem and further explained the study and invited them
to participate. Interested employees were then asked to
sign a consent form.
Individual interviews were conducted with a conveni-
ence sample of three healthcare administrators (one unit
manager, one director of care, and one infection controlspecialist) and eight nurses. There is no firm and fast
rule regarding the appropriate sample size in interpretive
descriptive research [27]; however, Thorne [28] notesthat the vast majority of studies using this approach are
likely to be relatively small. In addition, the predeter-
mined designation of the intervention unit limited thesample size; the facility employs only one director of
care and three infection control specialists, and the inter-
vention unit employs 24 nurses, further limiting thecomparison between nurses ’responses and those of the
administrators. To address these issues and to determine
an appropriate sample size, the authors applied the prin-ciples for deciding saturation in theory-based interview
studies, outlined by Francis and colleagues [27]. A mini-
mum sample size for initial analysis was determined tobe six nurses and three administrators. Subsequently,
two more interviews with nurses were conducted without
new ideas emerging. The authors were unable to recruitadditional administrators, as there were none available.
Ethics
All recruitment and data collection procedures were
approved by the facility ’s Research Ethics Board prior to
the start of the study. Given the potential to identify theindividual administrators as the director of care, infec-
tion control specialist, or the unit manager, the authors
decided to report their data as grouped responses, ratherthan individual data. No personal information was
recorded. Only the researchers had access to the data.
Interview guide
The TDF of behavior change describes a theoretical do-
main interview (TDI) [26] with 12 possible domains thatcan facilitate or hinder successful intervention imple-
mentation: knowledge, skills, social/professional role and
identity, beliefs about capabilities, beliefs about conse-quences, motivation and goals, memory and attention
and decision processes, environmental context and
resources, social influences, emotion, behavioral regula-tion, and nature of the behaviours (Table 1). All 12 of
these domains were of interest, so the TDI guide was
adapted to our study. For each of the 12 possibledomains that could act as facilitators or barriers to
current HH practices and a successful HH intervention
implementation, the authors developed several interviewquestions. These questions explored factors that might
influence nurses ’behavior change related to HH in gen-
eral and the specific EMS (Table 1).
Coding reliability
Each interview followed the same protocol to ensurequality control and started with broad, open-endedquestions followed by an increasing focus on specific
issues. The interviews were conducted in a private set-
ting using a semistructured guide, audiotaped, and tran-scribed verbatim. Subsequently, each transcript was
reviewed by the interviewer to ensure accuracy and in-
clusion of expressive detail [29].Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 3 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
Table 1 Behavioral-change domains and some interview questions to explore behaviour change
Behavioral-change domains Some interview questions to explore behaviour change
Knowledge Can you describe the guidelines to perform proper HH?
Can you discuss when to perform HH?Can you describe why you should be performing HH?Can you describe how the EMS works?Do you know what information the EMS can collect?
Skills Can you explain the proper procedure of performing HH?
How easy or difficult is it to perform HH on your unit?Can you describe how to use the EMS?Do you know how to respond when the EMS reminds you?
Social/professional role and identity
(self-standards)What role will the EMS play in enhancing HH?
Do you think the EMS should determine how you perform HH?
Do you feel that the guidelines for performing HH with the EMS are congruent with your professional
standards of practice?
Should proper HH be practiced at all levels of staff?
Beliefs about capabilities (self-efficacy) Difficult or easy is it for you to maintain proper HH?
What problems have you encountered when trying to practice proper HH?What would help you to increase HH compliance?How confident are you that you can increase compliance with the barriers and difficulties you face?How well equipped and comfortable do you feel in increasing your level of HH compliance?
When using the EMS?
How capable do you feel in maintaining increased compliance with HH? When using the EMS?How well will this EMS record your HH?
Beliefs about consequences (anticipated
outcomes/ attitudes)Does HH play an important role in your current practice? For yourself? For your patients? Can you
explain why?
Do you believe that this EMS will play an important role in your practice?Do you foresee any positive or negative outcomes of increased HH compliance on patient outcomes?
Staff outcomes? Do you foresee these outcomes/consequences as long term or short term?
Do you foresee a negative consequence of using the EMS? For patient outcomes? Staff outcomes?What do you think will happen if HH compliance is not increased in terms of patient outcomes? Staff
outcomes? Do you think these are short- or long-term consequences?
How will you feel if you are able to increase HH compliance? How will you feel if you do not?
Motivation and goals (intention) Would you like to increase your HH compliance?
Do you feel a need to increase your HH compliance?What are your reasons for increasing your HH compliance?Is there any aspect of your HH performance that you could improve on? Frequency, activity related?Are there other things that you would like to achieve that might interfere with increasing your
HH compliance?
Are there incentives to increasing HH compliance? If so, what are they?Are there incentives to use the EMS? If so, what are they?
Memory, attention, and decision processes Do you usually perform HH? How often on a regular shift?
Do you consciously think and make the decision to wash your hands?What factors influence that decision? Type of care activity? Type of patient? Time?How much attention do you have to pay to perform HH?Do you remember to perform HH? How?
Do you think the reminder system in the EMS will enhance your HH?
Can you think of times where you might not perform HH, such as competing tasks or time constraints?Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 4 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
Transcript analysis
Data were extracted by employing an inductive, inter-
active, comparative process that allows ideas or categor-ies to arise from the data [30]. First, all of the interview
data were reviewed and broken down into the TDI the-
oretical domains. Next, within each theoretical domain,discrete concepts were identified to allow comparisons
for similarities and differences (Table 2). An initial
coding scheme was developed to permit connections be-
tween concepts. The final step consisted of systematic-
ally relating core categories to other categories to extractbarriers and facilitators that could influence HH behav-
iour and the intervention implementation.
Two evaluators independently reviewed interview
transcripts to identify key words, phrases, and concepts
used by the participants to enhance accuracy of the ana-
lysis. Subsequently, they compared and contrasted codesemerging from the data to ensure consistency in the
definitions and interpretations of the codes. All data
were coded electronically according to standard qualita-tive coding techniques [28]. NVivo 9 (QSR International,Cambridge, MA, USA), an advanced storage-code-and-
retrieval software program, facilitated the organization
and analysis of the data. To ensure the reliability of theanalyses, an audit trail was used to maintain records and
encourage reflexivity of data collection and analysis pro-
cedures [31].
Results
Participants had no difficulty commenting on each ofthe different theoretical domains. The data provide valu-
able insights into our understanding of potential barriers
and facilitators within each domain to current HHpractices and to implementing the EMS intervention in
clinical practice. A summary of the key findings is pre-
sented below.
Knowledge
The knowledge domain contains the information thenurses have in regards to HH, the rationale about HH
compliance, the scientific evidence supporting HH, and
the procedural knowledge to perform HH and exploresTable 1 Behavioral-change domains and some interview questions to explore behaviour change (Continued)
Environmental context and resources
(environmental constraints)Where do you currently disinfect your hands?
Have you used a wearable alcohol dispenser device? How does this impact your HH performance?To what extent do physical or resource factors, such as the availability and functioning of wall units
and technology, facilitate or hinder performing HH?
Do you think necessary resources are available for staff to increase HH compliance?Do you believe that the EMS will enhance your HH performance?
Social influences (norms) Does HH play an important role on your unit? Can you explain why?
Do you believe that nursing staff on this unit are washing their hands when necessary?
To what extent do social influences facilitate or hinder performing HH? Social influence from your
peers? Managers? Other professional groups? Patients? Relatives?
Do you believe that there will be social influences from your peers to use the EMS? Managers?
Patients? Other groups?
Will you or have you ever observed others performing HH?Do you have role models in performing HH?
Emotion Does performing HH elicit an emotional response? If so, what?
To what extent will emotional factors facilitate or hinder your HH?Do you believe that emotional factors will influence the use of the EMS?
Behavioral regulation What initial steps need to be taken to improve HH compliance/use the EMS on an individual level?
How about on an organizational level?
Can you think of any procedures that would encourage increased HH compliance/use of EMS?
Nature of the behaviours How will the EMS increase HH compliance?
Who needs to work differently for this to occur? When? Where?How do you know whether increased HH compliance has occurred?What do you currently do in terms of performing HH?Is this a new or existing behavior that needs to become a habit?Can the context be used to prompt you to perform HH? (prompts: layout, reminders, equipment)How long do you think the changes are going to take?
HH= hand hygiene; EMS = electronic monitoring system.Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 5 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
if these act as facilitators with regards to HH. This do-
main also includes the participants ’understanding and
perceived rationale behind the EMS system, which could
potentially facilitate the intervention. Our main finding
for this domain was that the administrators (ADM),consisting of the director of care, the unit manager, and
the infection control specialist, all believed that the staff
have some understanding and knowledge relevant to theimplementation of the EMS, yet this knowledge is not
sufficient. Nurses, on the other hand, were confident
they have the required knowledge to perform HH anduse the EMS. Examples of this included the following:
“I would assume that people that work within our
program should be well advised. ”(ADM 1)
“We have enough education, we also have education
from infection control, they come up and doin-services, they also have it on the computer and
also give handouts. ”(RN 1, Interview 3)
Skills
This domain describes the skills and competencies to
perform HH and the procedural ability to use theEMS. Again, the data reveal a strong representation of
this domain by nurse participants who stated that they
have the skills required for performing HH and usingthe system.
“It’s not difficult at all. You have to use sanitizer or
water and soap to wash your hands. No, not difficultat all, because we are always having in-services
and computerized Q & A that we do from timeto time and other sort of information around. ”
(RN 2, Interview 4)
Administrators however, perceived the skill level of the
nurses as a potential limitation. The following quote
demonstrates this discrepancy:
“Yes, I think they have some of those skills. It is just
hard to focus on it. ”(ADM 1)
Social/professional role and identity
The third domain describes the nurses ’role and identity
in regards to performing HH and the EMS system.
Nurses and administrators clearly understood the
purpose of the system and thought positively aboutthe credibility of the EMS. Both groups describe the
system as supporting nurses with their professional iden-
tity. The social and group norms are demonstrated bythese quotes:
“This [the electronic monitoring system] is going to
be very helpful, we have to focus it correctly and to
the organization. ”(ADM 2)
“I think we will be more aware and more mindful of
stopping and taking the time to hand washing before
we move on, and when we come in and out of the
room. It is kind of drilled in our head now. ”(RN 3,
Interview 5)Table 2 Behavioral-change domains and descriptive codes
Behavioral-change domains Descriptive codes
Knowledge Description of information and knowledge as facilitators to performing HH and using the EMS.
Skills Description of skills and competencies as facilitators to performing HH and using the EMS.Social/professional role and identity
(self-standards)Description of the staff ’s role and identity on the unit as facilitators to performing HH and using
the EMS.
Beliefs about capabilities (self-efficacy) Description of perceived self-efficacy and control of behaviors as facilitators to performing HH and
using the EMS.
Beliefs about consequences (anticipated
outcomes/ attitudes)Description of beliefs about the consequences as facilitators to performing HH and using the EMS.
Motivation and goals (intention) Description of motivation and goals as facilitators to performing HH and using the EMS.
Memory, attention, and decision processes Description of memory, attention, and decision processes as facilitators to performing HH and using
the EMS.
Environmental context and resources
(environmental constraints)Description of availability and accessibility of resources as facilitators to performing HH and using the
EMS.
Social influences (norms) Description of social influence and the role of the healthcare team as facilitators to performing HH
and using the EMS.
Emotion Description of emotion (stress, fear, burnout, or positive or negative emotional responses) as a facilitator
to performing HH and using the EMS.
Behavioral regulation Description of behavioral regulation as a facilitator to performing HH and using the EMS.Nature of the behaviours Description of the nature of the behavior as a facilitator to performing HH and using the EMS.
HH= hand hygiene; EMS = electronic monitoring system.Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 6 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
Beliefs about capabilities
This domain describes nurses ’perceived self-efficacy and
control as potential barriers or facilitators to performHH and use the EMS:
“I think it will increase [HH] ...it will prompt us to
perform HH more differently along with the
education we get. I think it will lead us in the right
direction. ”(RN 3, Interview 5)
“Part of providing safe care, which is one of the
standards, is to make sure that your hands are clean
when you go to the patient. ”(RN 2, Interview 4)
Administrators accordingly described the nurses ’
beliefs about capabilities, yet added some difficultieswithin the healthcare environment that could potentially
interfere with the use of the system. In other words,
both groups perceived nurses to have behavioral control,yet administrators listed external difficulties and barriers
that would limit nurses ’ability to perform proper HH:
“I am a great believer that staff can perform at a very
high level but unfortunately, there are other things
that come up in that particular moment that may taketheir mind away from doing what they know is best
practice. ”(ADM 2)
Beliefs about consequences
The next domain describes nurses ’beliefs about the con-
sequences of HH and using the EMS as potential bar-riers or facilitators. In the interviews, nurses focused
consistently on the immediate outcome, that is, respond-
ing to the reminder signal to perform HH.
“I think [the EMS] will be very helpful and it will be a
good reminder, make people aware of how often theywash their hands and the importance of washing their
hands. ”(RN 1, Interview 3)
“It will impact everyone and it ’s going to be HH on a
higher level. ”(RN 5, Interview 7)
In contrast, administrators did not discuss the imme-
diate consequences of the EMS but talked about the lon-
gitudinal aspect of the EMS data and the subsequentevaluative component for comparing nurses ’perform-
ance. Administrators also described the contingencies of
the EMS, the benefits of using the system outweighingthe costs, and the reinforcement and/or rewards when
nurses did not perform as expected.
“I think with any system like this, at the beginning, it
is going to be very confidential and perhaps down the
line it may be reported to managers, and that isalways a concern for the staff. ”(ADM 3)Only the administrators discussed the cost associated
with increased HH compliance and the effect of the sys-
tem that might lead to poor implementation of the EMS.
Motivation and goals
This domain explores the barriers or facilitators to themotivations and goals to practice HH and use the EMS
system. This domain refers to how high a priority the
target behaviour is for the participant. Nurses concen-trated foremost on their personal safety and their fam-
ilies ’safety as a source of motivation to perform HH:
“Since we had SARS, people are very, very conscious
about what they can take home to their family, so
they are very, very conscious. ”(RN 1, Interview 3)
Interestingly, only one of the nurses mentioned patient
safety when discussing the intention to perform HH oruse the system initially. Administrators, on the other
hand, did not discuss nurses ’personal safety as a motivator
but believed that nurses would display some intrinsicand external motivators to perform HH, such as pro-
fessional commitment, individual and unit incentives,
and personalized goal setting:
“Incentive is good for a group who want to do well.
There is no incentive for the others who draw backand do nothing, depends on the individual and the
group. ”(ADM 3)
“...even with results from infection control, it is
always shared with staff and they are proud to hear
what the results are and it ’s just going to be ongoing
with continuous feedback and enhance the handhygiene. ”(ADM 2)
The emphasis on a different characteristic within the
domain of motivation and goals suggests that the imple-
mentation of the EMS will need to address these differ-
ing perspectives.
Memory, attention, and decision processes
This domain explores memory, attention, and decision
processes as barriers or facilitators in regards to influen-
cing nurses ’decisions to wash hands and use the EMS
system. As optimal HH is considered best practice in
nursing practice, it would be assumed that nurses per-
ceive HH as a routine procedure, a task they usuallycarry out before entering or after leaving a patient room.
Nurses supported this assumption by clearly stating that
they are constantly aware of the need to wash theirhands, as demonstrated by these quotes:
“I am consciously thinking about [performing HH],
especially when you are in a room with fourBoscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 7 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
people ...we don ’t want to go back and forth and you
try to be more aware, or when you are coming out of
the room, you try to make sure you wash before goingin.”(RN 3, Interview 5)
“...I see the pump right there in the hall, so once I
see it, I use it and go into the room and when I comeout, I look for it and use it again ....”(RN 3,
Interview 5)
Conversely, administrators stated that the staff do not
remember to focus on performing HH and do not have
the decision processes in place to judge whether HH isnecessary or not.
“I think they don ’t have time and I think they don't
regard it seriously. ”(ADM 3)
This interesting disparity calls for a need to collect
data on the actual attention and decision processes of
the nurses during the intervention implementation of
the EMS.
Environmental context and resources
This domain explores the availability and accessibility ofresources to perform HH and use the EMS system as a
facilitator to enhance HH and the EMS intervention.
Both administrators and nursing staff felt there were ad-equate resources available, and accessibility and func-
tionality of the resources were not deemed problematic.
“When I worked in long-term care there were no
sinks in any of the rooms and now, you can ’t go far
out of a room without finding one. ”(ADM 3)
“I think there are enough [resources] that are in place
where we can easily access it. ”(RN 3, Interview 5)
The above quotes indicate that this domain is relevant,
yet not problematic, to the implementation of the EMS.
Social influences
This next domain explores social influence as a potential
barrier or facilitator in improving HH and using theEMS. Nurses and administrators had a very different
perspective on the relevance of social influence. Admin-
istrators assumed that social support by peers, adminis-trators, other professional groups, or patients would
facilitate HH compliance. Furthermore, they anticipated
that strong performers would act as role models and lea-ders to invite weaker performers to increase their HH
performance. Teamwork and group cohesion will be a
strong support to enhance the implementation of theEMS. Administrators also perceived that social support
and teamwork would be utilized in a positive manner to
help everyone achieve the goal of enhanced HH.“I think that there are some staff that really get it and
there could be a peer support system. ”(ADM 3)
“When you have a role model that already thinks so
positively of them [nurses], then they want to follow
that type of role model. ”(ADM 2)
Conversely, nurses described the social influences as a
deterrent to implementing the system. Nurses were not
interested in group conformity or social comparisons.Rather, they focused on their own behavior as negative
social influence, potentially causing inter-group conflict.
Nurses were focused on improving their individual per-formance and did not want to act as role models or lea-
ders. They would rather leave poor performers to their
own devices.
“...people do watch other people .... people would
not like to talk or work with other people that did notwash their hands, so they are going to shun that
person. ”(RN 1, Interview 3)
“...once you say something you make them feel like
you are watching them, looking for some mistakes,
and of course, they ’re going to retaliate. They ’re going
to do the same thing to you. And then it ’s just going
to escalate and then you ’re going to have problems. It
is good to tell them, I understand that, but there are
consequences. ”(RN 6, Interview 9)
Emotion
The domain of emotion delves into any stress, fear,
burnout, or emotional responses (positive or negative)
that could be caused by performing HH and using the
EMS acting as potential barriers or facilitators to enhan-cing HH. The authors note that this domain might ap-
pear to overlapping with the domain on the beliefs
about consequences. To avoid any confusion, theauthors strictly adhered to the theoretical domains dis-
cussed in the interviews and reported the results as
such.
The EMS records or prompts nurses to comply with
each opportunity for HH. Given a current HH compli-
ance rate of below 40%, it is anticipated that nurses willhave to double their HH activity, potentially causing a
cognitive overload or even physical tiredness. The
administrators seemed to be well aware of this risk,claiming that some of the HH performance measures
cause frustration or a negative emotional response in
staff:
“Guidelines could drive them crazy. ”(ADM 2)
Nurses described negative emotions in relation to their
own and families ’safety, although this was not directed
towards the EMS or the HH practice.Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 8 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
“Fear and safety, you know because when we are here
and we are more prone to anything that is here, then
you don ’tw a n tt ob r i n gh o m ef l ut oa n y o n ee l s e . ”
(RN 3, Interview 5)
Behavioral regulation
This domain describes the behavioral regulation, that is,
the preparatory steps needed to perform enhanced HH
and use the EMS, as a barrier or facilitator. Within thisdomain, nurses described the importance of individual
feedback and self-monitoring in order to increase their
performance. Nurses reported being in favor of meetingwith a mentor on a one-to-one basis to discuss goals
and targets and to identify priorities and analyze per-
formance data to support improvement:
“At the individual level, reminders. I think at the
organizational level we are not doing too bad becausewe are doing a lot of teaching, so you know, it
remains ongoing. We will get to a point where it will
be at a higher level. ”(RN 3, Interview 5)
Administrators however, believe that this behavioral
regulation might be a barrier in the implementation ofthe EMS. As one of the administrators describes,
“I don ’t think they [nurses] understand the
importance. I think it still goes back to the education
and we don ’t have a lot of infections here so, why
should I bother to get it? They also haven ’t had
patients ask them, ‘Have you washed your hands
before you touch me? ’”(ADM 1)
Nature of behaviours
This last domain depicts the nature of the proposed be-
haviour, that is, improved HH compliance, as a facilita-tor in regards to the current HH practice and the use of
the EMS system. According to nurses, HH is currently
being practiced as a routine, relying on habit. Yet, re-search also indicates that this “routine ”is followed in
less than half of the situations where HH actions are
required. The proposed HH behavior will not be any dif-
ferent than the current practice, however, the behavior
will need to be performed more frequently. Nurses wereaware that, as a group, the existing behavior needed to
be practiced more often and that the EMS will prompt
this new behavior:
“It maybe varies with other team members, yes, but
with nursing, I think it is more on the table to keepyour hands clean when going to another patient. Take
your glove off and wash your hands. And I think it is
because of all the education sessions, reminders likethe [EMS]. ”(RN 1, Interview 3)Administrators supported this response as well but
indicated that increasing the frequency of the proposed
behavior might be more difficult than anticipated:
“...you have to build in sustainability and
accountability, right ...And the accountability can ’t
always lie with the manager. The staff has to be
accountable, but how are we going to monitor it to
make sure it is sustained? Because it falls off realquick. ”(ADM 3)
Discussion
This study used the TDI [26] to explore barriers and
facilitators to current HH practices and the implementa-
tion of a new EMS to improve HH practice. Semistruc-tured in-depth interviews were conducted that compared
perceptions of nurses and administrators. In this study,
facilitators and barriers to current HH practices and theimplementation of the EMS intervention ranged from
the individual level to organizational and social contexts.
For the majority of the theoretical domains, differencesin responses were noted between the administrators and
the nurses. These differences provide insight into consid-
erations for how the intervention should be implemented,as directed by the knowledge-to-action cycle [22].
Knowledge was perceived both as a barrier and facili-
tator by the participants. Nurses believed they alreadyhad sufficient knowledge about HH, whereas the admin-
istrators perceived that the nurses did not; therefore, the
lack of knowledge acted as a barrier to current HH prac-tices and the implementation of the EMS. This discrep-
ancy will need to be addressed in the implementation
plan for the EMS intervention. If nurses believe theyhave the knowledge and awareness as to how and when
to perform HH, competency testing and educational ses-
sions to update nurses ’knowledge and skills will not be
viewed as useful. Rather, a focus on understanding why
nurses decide to perform or skip HH actions may be of
greater importance for the successful implementation ofthe EMS. For example, some of these reasons to perform
or neglect HH could be explored during weekly and
monthly educational sessions with the participants, ra-ther than just focusing on a discussion of actual HH
compliance rates [18].
One of the biggest discrepancies between the two
groups was related to the beliefs about consequences
domain. Administrators clearly indicated the potential
consequences of using the EMS in the long term as apotential barrier, whereas nursing staff only perceived the
immediate outcomes of the system. The lack of nurses ’
focus on long-term outcomes might indicate that nursesdo not realize the capabilities of the system, a problem
easily corrected by providing additional information in
the recruitment session or during the individualizedBoscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 9 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
educational sessions [18]; it might also point to a more
serious issue based in a lack of ongoing commitment to
improve practice. This phenomenon has been reportedby other researchers analyzing quality improvements in
nursing practice [32] and results from the current prac-
tice development movement focusing on immediate re-portable outcomes and the lack of a systematic approach
to the practice change. As a result, nurses act upon the
immediate demand to change practice, yet they do notperceive the change in practice to be necessary nor valu-
able [32]. In order to create a sustainable HH practice
change, it will be necessary to continuously explore andaddress individual nurses ’development and empower-
ment during the intervention phase.
Another major difference was in the social influences
domain. Nurses did not describe social influences, such
as the opinion or care practice of colleagues, as an en-
abler to implementation of the EMS. Nurses were fo-cused on improving their individual performance and
preferred to stay away from poor performers as opposed
to creating a supportive network to enhance HH prac-tice. The individuality of nursing performance has previ-
ously been described in the nursing literature [33].
Despite careful evidence on appropriate levels of HHand staff performance, [11,33] it appears that this know-
ledge was not translated to staff and administrators in
this practice setting. Both administrators and nursingstaff in this study and others did not know how often
staff perform HH or the level of performance at the unit
or facility level, nor do they know the acceptable HHcompliance rates [34]. When developing the implemen-
tation plan, the integration of anonymous group data in
the individual performance reports and the discussion ofthese data in the educational sessions with the individual
participants might create a heightened awareness of
one ’s own performance compared to others [18,22,35].
The apparent differences between administrators and
nurses in regards to several barriers and facilitators to-
ward HH points to an intervention implementationstrategy that will need to focus on the provision of sup-
port and mentoring for the nurses, rather than solely
improving the frequency of HH [18,35].
Based on the data, the next step in the EMS interven-
tion implementation needs to consist of identifyingbehavior-change techniques that target these specific
determinants, such as self-monitoring of performance,
graded goal setting and improving HH practice, andmodeling and demonstration of behaviors by others
[20-22,35]. Norms can be addressed by modeling/
demonstration of behaviors by others; social processesof encouragement, pressure, and support; and prompts,
triggers, cues [35,36]. Another behavior-change tech-
nique that will be considered during the interventionimplementation is the use of the EMS data to create“social influences ”in order to enhance the uptake [36].
Weekly individual performance data reports will include
a graph that indicates other participants ’overall compli-
ance data to compare personal data against the levels in
the group. During individual meetings with the partici-
pant, specific information on how to increase HH, vari-ous techniques for increasing HH (prompts, triggers,
cues), and suggestions on how to change the behavior
will be provided [18].
Limitations identified in this research include potential
social desirability bias, the use of a simple coding
scheme, and the small sample from one hospital unit.Further research is required to validate and refine this
theoretical framework and the coding procedure [24].
Specific areas of interest for this research are related toidentifying the most important determinants or behaviour-
change domains, so as to guide the selection of which
determinants to address and/or which of the techniquesto adopt when implementing an intervention. It would
also be beneficial to explore the relationship between the
domains. If the awareness or skills are improved, wouldthis change affect beliefs or capabilities? Lastly, it is im-
portant to note that despite the overall agreement within
the nurses ’sample, the responses represent perceptions
and not actual skills or knowledge. This was clearly
demonstrated when all nurses claimed they had sufficient
knowledge of HH guidelines, yet there was a clear gap inHH knowledge when asked specifically about HH skills.
This suggests that relying on only perceptions is not suf-
ficient and could negatively impact the implementationof the intervention.
Significance
HAIs affect many patients and often result in suffering
and deaths. Consistent HH can reduce these infection
rates by up to 50%, yet healthcare staff often fail to per-form HH. Several attempts have been made to improve
compliance, without significant sustained increases.
Novel approaches combined with a clear understandingof how to change nurses ’behaviour are required to im-
prove HH compliance.
This work is an essential first step towards identifying
factors affecting nurses ’behavior change associated with
HH compliance. Findings of this study will guide the
identification of optimal strategies to enhance adoptionof “best HH practice ”by nurses working in different
practice environments and will inform the subsequent
intervention study [22]. The end goal of the interventionstudy is to enhance and sustain improved HH compli-
ance and, ultimately, improve the safety and health of
patients receiving care.
Findings of this study will lead to a better understand-
ing of the effect of an intervention employing a monitor-
ing system on HH compliance and will be instrumentalBoscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 10 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
in providing evidence to support intervention design
and interpretation and decisions made by policy makers
around HH practices. By enhancing and understandingfactors underlying HH behaviour, this research will ul-
timately contribute to safer and better-quality care for
patients. This study also contributes to the knowledgetranslation literature in that the knowledge generated
from this work will provide a structured approach to
developing an implementation plan with a better under-standing of how to enhance healthcare professionals ’
behaviours in complex interventions.
Conclusion
This qualitative study demonstrated the value in using
psychological theories commonly used in knowledgetranslation to explore barriers and facilitators to current
HH practices and when implementing an intervention to
improve HH practice. Perspectives of administrators andnurses were compared for their relevance to HH and the
implementation of an EMS to enhance HH. The results
provide a better understanding of nurses ’behaviour-
change processes of the EMS intervention and will be
integrated to refine the implementation plan.
Rigorous exploration of theoretical domains of behav-
ior change acting as potential barriers and facilitators
will not only lead to appropriate selection of the inter-
vention components but will also promote the adapta-tion of the knowledge to the local context. In respecting
these simple, yet essential, steps in the process of inte-
grating knowledge into practice before actual interven-tion design and implementation, it is hypothesized that
interventions will be more successful and acquired
knowledge more sustainable.
Competing interests
VMB received funding from Toronto Rehabilitation Institute for thedevelopment and testing of the EMS. GRF is Vice President of Research atToronto Rehabilitation Institute and is the principal investigator on the EMS
project. The other authors declare they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
VMB was responsible for the research idea and project management and led
the interview design and data analysis. She wrote the first draft of the paper
and subsequent redrafts. All authors contributed to the development of theresearch objectives and methods and to the writing of the paper. JHLsupported the data collection and helped analyze data. All authors read and
approved the final research protocol and manuscript. All authors contributed
equally to this study.
Authors' information
VMB is currently the CIHR Schlegel Chair for Enhanced Seniors' Care,
Schlegel-University of Waterloo Research Institute for Aging (RIA) & School ofHealth & Life Sciences and Community Services, Conestoga College Instituteof Technology and Advanced Learning. At the time of the study, VMB was a
postdoctoral fellow at Toronto Rehabilitation Institute. SBJ is the Toronto
Rehabilitation Institute Chair at the University of Toronto.
Acknowledgments
Funding for this study was received by the Canadian Institute of Health
Research (funding reference #HTX 80047, XHT 83447, and CIHR 102887),Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, and the Ontario Centers of Excellence(Project # TO-CR-1007 4 –08). Toronto Rehabilitation Institute receives funding
under the Provincial Rehabilitation Research Program from the Ministry of
Health and Long-Term Care in Ontario.
Author details
1Schlegel-University of Waterloo Research Institute for Aging (RIA) & School
of Health & Life Sciences and Community Services, Conestoga CollegeInstitute of Technology and Advanced Learning, Kitchener, ON, Canada.
2Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada.3Department of
Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.4Department of Physical
Therapy, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Received: 3 October 2011 Accepted: 8 August 2012
Published: 28 August 2012
References
1. Daschner FD: The transmission of infections in hospitals by staff carriers,
methods of prevention and control. Infect Control 1985, 6(3):97 –99.
2. Haas JP, Larson EL: Compliance with hand hygiene guidelines: Where are
we in 2008? Am J Nurs 2008, 108(8):40 –44.
3. World Health Organization: WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Healthcare .
Geneva: WHO; 2009.
4. Centers for Disease Control (CDC): Public health focus: surveillance,
prevention, and control of nosocomial infections. MMWR Morb Mortal
Wkly Rep 1992, 41(42):783 –787.
5. Stone PW, Larson E, Kawar LN: A systematic audit of economic evidence
linking nosocomial infections and infection control interventions:
1990 –2000. Am J Infect Control 2002, 30(3):145 –152.
6. Zoutman DE, Ford BD, Bryce E, et al:The state of infection surveillance
and control in Canadian acute care hospitals. Am J Infect Control 2003,
31(5):266 –272.
7. World Health Organization (WHO): WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in
Health Care (Advanced Draft) . Geneva: World Health Organization; 2006.
8. Health Canada Laboratory Centre for Disease Control, Division of
Nosocomial and Occupational Infections: Construction-related nosocomial
infections in patients in health care facilities , Canada Communicable Disease
Report. Ottawa, Canada: Health Canada; 2011.
9. Pittet D, Hugonnet S, Harbarth S, et al:Effectiveness of a hospital-wide
programme to improve compliance with hand hygiene. Lancet 2000,
356(9248):2196 –2205.
10. Stone SP: Hand hygiene –the case for evidence-based education. J R Soc
Med 2001, 94(6):278 –281.
11. Boyce JM, Pittet D, Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory
Committee, & HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand Hygiene Task Force:Guideline for hand hygiene in health-care settings. recommendations of
the healthcare infection control practices advisory committee and the
HICPAC/SHEA/APIC/IDSA Hand hygiene task force. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep
Recomm Rep 2002, 51(RR16):1 –44.
12. Gould D, Chudleigh JH, Moralejo D, Drey N: Interventions to improve hand
hygiene compliance in patient care.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007,
2:1–18.
13. Naikoba S, Hayward A: The effectiveness of interventions aimed at
increasing handwashing in healthcare workers - a systematic review.
J Hosp Infect 2001, 47(3):173 –180.
14. Rosenthal VD, Guzman S, Safdar N: Reduction in nosocomial infection with
improved hand hygiene in intensive care units of a tertiary care hospital
in Argentina. Am J Infect Control 2005, 33(7):392 –397.
15. Boscart VM, Gorski S, Holliday P, Hufton G, Levchenko A, Marquez-Chin C,
McGilton K, Momen K, Tsang M, Fernie G: Advanced technologies to curb
healthcare-associated infections. HealthcarePapers 2009, 9(3):52 –55.
16. Swoboda SM, Earsing K, Strauss K, Lane S, Lipsett PA: Electronic monitoring
and voice prompts improve hand hygiene and decrease nosocomialinfections in an intermediate care unit. Crit Care Med 2004,
32(2):358 –363.
17. Boscart VM, Levchenko AI, Fernie GR: Defining the configuration of a
hand hygiene monitoring system. Am J Infect Control 2010,
38(7):518 –522.
18. Levchenko AI, Hufton GC, Boscart VM, Fernie GR: Embedded system for
hygiene compliance monitoring. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science
and Engineering 2010, 7(3):695 –698.Boscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 11 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
19. Boscart VM, McGilton K, Levchenko A, Hufton G, Holliday P, Fernie G:
Acceptability of a wearable hand wash device with monitoring
capabilities. Journal of Hospital Infections 2008, 70:216 –222.
20. Boscart VM, Levchenko A, Fernie G: Automated hand hygiene monitoring:
Perspectives for healthcare staff, management, and infection control
specialists. ICU Management 2010, 10(1):28 –30.
21. Straus S, Tetroe J, Graham ID: Knowledge translation in health care: Moving
from evidence to practice . 1st edition. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd; 2009.
22. Grol R: Success and failures in the implementation of evidence-based
guidelines for clinical practice. Medical Care 2001, 39:1146 –1154.
23. Michie S, Berentson-Shaw J, Pilling S, Feder G, Dieppe P, Raine R, Cluzeau F,
Alderson P, Ellis S: Turning evidence into recommendations: protocol of a
study guideline development groups. Implementation Science 2007,
5(2):29.
24. Health Canada LCfDCDoNaOI: Routine practices and additional
precautions for preventing the transmission of infection in health care.
Can Commun Dis Rep 1999, 25(S4):1 –142.
25. Michie S, Johnston M, Abraham C, Lawton R, Parker D, Walker A: Making
psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: a
consensus approach. Qual Safe Health Care 2005, 14:26–33.
26. Thorne S: Interpretive description . Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press; 2008.
27. Francis JJ, Johnston M, Robertson C, Glidewell L, Entwistle V, Eccles MP,
Grimshaw JM: What is an adequate sample size? Operationalising data
saturation for theory-based interview studies. Psychol Health 2010,
25(10):1229 –1245.
28. Poland B: Transcription quality as an aspect of rigor in qualitative
research. Qualitative Inquiry 1995, 1(3):290 –310.
29. Glesne C, Peshkin A: Becoming qualitative researchers: An introduction . White
Plains, NY: Longman; 1992.
30. Schwandt T: Dictionary of qualitative inquiry . 2nd edition. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications; 2001.
31. Masters K: Role development in professional nursing practice . Sudbury, MA:
Jones & Bartlett Publishers, Inc; 2005.
32. Melnyk BM, Fineout-Overholt E, Stone P, Ackerman M: Evidence-based
practice: The past, the present, and recommendations for the
millennium. Paediatr Nurs 2000, 26(1):77 –80.
33. Muller MP, Detsky AS: Public reporting of hospital hand hygiene
compliance –helpful or harmful? JAMA 2010, 304(10):1116 –1117.
34. Michie S, Johnston M, Francis J, Hardeman W, Eccles M: From theory to
intervention: Mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants to
behaviour change techniques. Applied Psychology: An International Review
2008, 57(4):660 –680.
35. Abraham C, Michie S: A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychol 2008, 27(3):379 –387.
36. Janzen AJ, Silvius J, Jacobs S, Slaughter S, Dalziel W, Drummond N: What is
a health expectation? Developing a pragmatic conceptual model from
psychological theory. Health Expect 2006, 9(1):37 –48.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-77
Cite this article as: Boscart et al. :Using psychological theory to inform
methods to optimize the implementation of a hand hygiene
intervention. Implementation Science 2012 7:77.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitBoscart et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:77 Page 12 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/77
