RESEARCH Open Access
Implementing collaborative care for depression
treatment in primary care: A cluster randomizedevaluation of a quality improvement practiceredesign
Edmund F Chaney1*, Lisa V Rubenstein2,3,4, Chuan-Fen Liu1,5, Elizabeth M Yano2,4, Cory Bolkan6, Martin Lee2,4,
Barbara Simon2, Andy Lanto2, Bradford Felker1,7and Jane Uman5
Abstract
Background: Meta-analyses show collaborative care models (CCMs) with nurse care management are effective for
improving primary care for depression. This study aimed to develop CCM approaches that could be sustained and
spread within Veterans Affairs (VA). Evidence-based quality improvement (EBQI) uses QI approaches within aresearch/clinical partnership to redesign care. The study used EBQI methods for CCM redesign, tested theeffectiveness of the locally adapted model as implemented, and assessed the contextual factors shapingintervention effectiveness.
Methods: The study intervention is EBQI as applied to CCM implementation. The study uses a cluster randomized
design as a formative evaluation tool to test and improve the effectiveness of the redesign process, with seven
intervention and three non-intervention VA primary care practices in five different states. The primary studyoutcome is patient antidepressant use. The context evaluation is descriptive and uses subgroup analysis. Theprimary context evaluation measure is naturalistic primary care clinician (PCC) predilection to adopt CCM.
For the randomized evaluation, trained telephone research interviewers enrolled consecutive primary care patients
with major depression in the evaluation, referred enrolled patients in intervention practices to the implementedCCM, and re-surveyed at seven months.
Results: Interviewers enrolled 288 CCM site and 258 non-CCM site patients. Enrolled intervention site patients were
more likely to receive appropriate antidepressant care (66% versus 43%, p = 0.01), but showed no significant
difference in symptom improvement compared to usual care. In terms of context, only 40% of enrolled patients
received complete care management per protocol. PCC predilection to adopt CCM had substantial effects on
patient participation, with patients belonging to early adopter clinicians completing adequate care manager follow-up significantly more often than patients of clinicians with low predilection to adopt CCM (74% versus 48%%, p =0.003).
Conclusions: Depression CCM designed and implemented by primary care practices using EBQI improved
antidepressant initiation. Combining QI methods with a randomized evaluation proved challenging, but enabled
new insights into the process of translating research-based CCM into practice. Future research on the effects of
PCC attitudes and skills on CCM results, as well as on enhancing the link between improved antidepressant useand symptom outcomes, is needed.
Trial Registration: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT00105820
* Correspondence: chaney@u.washington.edu
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle Washington, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121
Implementation
Science
© 2011 Chaney et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Background
Despite efficacious therapies, depression remains a lead-
ing cause of disability [1-3]. Most depression is detectedin primary care, yet rates of appropriate treatment for
detected patients remain low. There is ample rando-
mized trial evidence that collaborative care management(CCM) for depression is an effective [4-6] and cost-effective [7] approach to improving treatment and out-comes for these patients. In CCM, a care manager sup-ports primary care clinicians (PCCs) in assessing andtreating depression symptoms, often with active involve-ment of collaborating mental health specialists. Care
managers typically carry out a comprehensive initial
assessment followed by a seri es of subsequent contacts
focusing on treatment adherence and patient educationand/or activation. Use of CCM, however, is not yetwidespread in routine primary care settings. This studyaimed to use a cluster-randomized design to formativelyevaluate the success of evidence-based quality improve-ment (EBQI) methods in implementing effective CCM
as part of routine Veteran Affairs (VA) care. Problems
detected through our rigorous evaluation could then beused to support higher quality model development forsustaining and spreading CCM in VA primary carepractices natio nally. The study ’s major goals were thus:
to learn about the process of i mplementing research in
practice, including effects of context; to test the effec-tiveness of EBQI for adapting research-based CCM
while maintaining its effectiveness; and to provide infor-
mation for improving the implemented model.
Implementation of CCM as part of routine primary
care requires system redesign. EBQI is a redesignmethod that supports clinical managers in making useof prior evidence on effective care models while takingaccount of local context [8-10]. For this study, VAregional leaders and partic ipating local sites adapted
CCM to VA system and site conditions using EBQI[11]. We term the locally adapted CCM model EBQI-CCM. The study used a cluster-randomized design toevaluate seven EBQI-CCM primary care practices versusthree equivalent practices without EBQI-CCM.
Theory suggests that durable organizational change of
the kind required by CCM is most likely when stake-holders are involved in design and implementation
[12,13]. Yet classical continuous quality improvement
(CQI) for depression, which maximizes participation,
does not improve outcomes [14,15]. EBQI, a more struc-tured form of CQI that engages leaders and QI teams insetting depression care priorities and understanding theevidence base and focuses teams on adapting existingCCM evidence and tools, has been more successful[8,16-18]. This study built on previous EBQI studies byadding external technical expert support from theresearch team to leverage the efforts of QI teams [19].
CCM can be considered a practice innovation.
Research shows that early adopters of innovations maybe different from those who lag in using the innovation[ 2 0 ] .W eh y p o t h e s i z e dt h a tC C M ,w h i c hd e p e n d so n
PCC participation, might yield different outcomes for
patients of early adopter clinicians compared to patientsof clinicians who demonstrated less use of the model.We found no prior CCM studies on this topic. Becausethis study tested a CCM model that was implementedas routine care prior to and during the randomized trialreported here, we were able to classify clinicians interms of predilection to adopt CCM based on their
observed model participation outside of the randomized
trial. We then assessed CCM outcomes for our enrolledpatient sample as a function of their PCC ’s predilection
to adopt the model.
In this paper, we evaluate implementation by asking
the intent to treat question: did depressed EBQI-CCMpractice patients enrolled in the randomized evaluationand referred to CCM have better care than depressed
patients at practices not implementing CCM? We also
asked the contextual subgroup question: do EBQI-CCMsite patients of early adopter clinicians experience differ-ent CCM participation outcomes than those of clinicianswith a low predilection to adopt CCM? Because ourpurpose was to study and formatively evaluate theimplementation of a well-researched technology [5], ourgrant proposal powered the study on a process of care
change (antidepressant use). We also assessed pre-post
depression symptom outcome data on all patientsreferred to care management as part of EBQI. This datais documented elsewhere [11], and is used in this paperto gain insight into differences between naturalistically-referred patients (representing true routine care use ofCCM in the sites outside of research) and study enrolledpatients.
Methods
This study evaluated EBQI-CCM implementationthrough a cluster-randomiz ed trial. The EBQI process
occurred in seven randomly allocated group practices inthree VA multi-state administrative regions; three addi-tional practices (one in each region) were simulta-neously selected to serve as comparison sites in the
subsequent cluster randomized evaluation reported here.
Primary care providers began referring their patients toEBQI-CCM through VA ’s usual computer-based consult
system a year prior to any patient enrollment in the ran-d o m i z e de v a l u a t i o na sp a r to ft h eo n g o i n gT I D E S(Translating Initiatives i n Depression into EffectiveChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 2 of 15
Solutions) QI program [19]. Additional information on
the EBQI process and QI outcomes is available [11].
Setting
Researchers formed partnerships with three volunteerVeterans Health Administra tion regions between 2001
and 2002 to foster a CCM implementation QI project(TIDES). Participating regions spanned 19 states in theMidwest and South. Regional directors agreed to engagetheir mental health, primary care, QI, and nursing lea-dership in EBQI teams for improving depression care,and to provide release time to enable team members toparticipate. Each region agreed to hire a care managerfor depression. Researchers provided dollars totaling the
e q u i v a l e n to fo n eh a l f t i m en u r s ec a r em a n a g e rf o r2 1
months to each region.
Prior to initiation of EBQI, each regional administrator
agreed to identify three primary care practices of similarsize, availability of mental health personnel, and patientpopulation profiles for participation in the study. Studypractices mirrored staffing ch aracteristics of small to
medium-sized non-academic practices nationally in VA.
As described elsewhere, however, baseline levels of par-
ticipation in care for depression in primary care varied[21].
Randomization
In 2002, the study statistician randomly assigned onepractice per region as control practices, and the remain-ing two practices per region to EBQI-CCM. One of the
six EBQI-CCM sites selected by regional administrators
was a single administrative entity but composed of twogeographically separated practices with different staffing.We therefore analyzed it as two separate practices for atotal of seven EBQI-CCM sites.
Human Subjects Protection
All study procedures for the QI process and for the ran-
domized evaluation were approved by Institutional
Review Boards (IRBs) at each participating site and ateach site housing investigators (a total of eight IRBs).
EBQI Intervention
We described the steps, or phases, in the TIDES EBQIprocess and their cost in prior publications [19]. Theseinclude: preparation (leadership engagement); design
(developing a basic design at the regional level and
engaging local practices); and implementation (Plan-Do-Study-Act or PDSA cycles to refine CCM until itbecomes stable as part of routine care). The randomizedtrial reported here began during the early implementa-tion phase of TIDES.
During preparation (approximately 2001 and 2002),
each region learned about the project and identified itsregional leadership team. D uring the design phase, the
regional leadership team and representatives from somelocal sites carried out a modified Delphi panel [8,22] toset CCM design features. For example, two out of threeregions chose primarily telephone-based rather than in-person care management [23], reflecting concern for
providing mental health access to rural veterans. The
remaining region switched to this approach after initialPDSA cycles.
The implementation phase began with enrollment of
the first patient in a PDSA cycle. After the depressioncare manager (DCM) was designated or hired, she anda single PCC initially worked together to plan andimplement rapid enlarging PDSA cycles that aimed to
test the referral process, safety, process of depression
care, and outcomes. Cycles began with one patient andone clinician in each particip ating practice. After sev-
eral cycles ( e.g., 10 to 15 patients) care managers
began engaging additional clinicians and patientsthrough academic detailing and local seminars [24,25].A total of 485 patients had entered CCM by June 2003prior to the start of the randomized trial. Thus, in all
practices, the EBQI-designed CCM model was part of
routine care before recruitment for the randomizedevaluation began [19]. When randomized trial enroll-ment began, care manager w orkloads were in equili-
brium, with similar numbers of patients entering andexiting CCM. During and after the trial improvementwork continued, with for instance a focus on caremanager electronic decision support, training, and
methods for engaging primary care providers, but at a
gradual pace.
PDSA cycles require aims, measures, and feedback.
Initial aims focused on successful development of pro-gram components. For example, for decision support,PDSA cycles assessed questions such as: Is the DCM ’s
initial assessment c apturing information necessary for
treatment planning? Are DCMs activating patients [26]?
How usable is EBQI-CCM information technology for
consultation, assessment, and follow-up [27-29]? For
patient safety, cycles asked: Is there a working suiciderisk management protocol in place [30]? Later cyclesfocused on how to best publicize the intervention andeducate staff and how to best manage more complicatedpatients through collaboration with mental health spe-cialists [31,32]. Throughout all cycles, DCMs monitored
patient process of care and outcomes.
In terms of measures, we rigorously trained DCMs to
administer instruments ( e.g., the PHQ-9) and keep
registries of patient process and outcomes. Registry
data provided measures for overarching quarterlyPDSA cycles focused on patient enrollment ( e.g.,
patients referred versus enrolled), patient process ofcare ( e.g., treatments, location of care in primary careChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 3 of 15
or mental health specialty), and patient symptom
outcomes.
PDSA cycles involved feedback to participants. Inter-
disciplinary workgroups were the major forum for shar-ing and discussing PDSA results [31]. In the caremanagement and patient self-management support
workgroup, care managers met weekly for an hour by
phone. Lead mental health specialists and lead PCCsmet monthly in the collaborative care workgroup, whileregional leaders (administrative, mental health, and pri-mary care) met quarterly in the senior leader work-group. Study team members assisted in administrativelysupporting the workgroups, reviewing cycle results, andsupporting improvement design.
The study team fed back results for quarterly site-level
PDSAs on patient process and outcomes to care man-agers, primary care, mental health, and administrative
leaders at practice, medical center, and Veteran ’sI n t e -
grated Service Network (VISN) levels. Quarterly reportswere formatted like laboratory tests, with a graph ofpatient outcome results; an example report is includedin a previous publication [11].
Randomized evaluation sample
Researchers created a database of potential patient eva-luation participants from CCM and non-CCM practicesusing VA electronic medical r ecords. Inclusion criteria
were having at least one primary care appointment inthe preceding 12 months in a participating practice, andhaving one pending appointment scheduled within the
three months post-selection (n = 28, 474). Exclusion cri-
teria were having conditions that required urgent care(acute suicidality, psychosis), inability to communicateover the telephone, or prior na turalistic referral by the
patient ’s PCC to the DCM.
Data collection
Trained interviewers from California Survey Research
Services Inc. (CSRS) screened eligible patients for
depression or dysthymia symptoms between June 2003and June 2004 using the first two questions of thePHQ-9 [33] by telephone interview. Interviewers admi-nistered the balance of th e PHQ-9 to screen positive
patients, and enrolled those with probable major depres-sion based on a PHQ-9 score of 10 or above. Inter-viewers referred eligible and consenting evaluation
patients to the appropriate DCM for treatment. Evalua-
tion patients were re-surveyed by CSRS at seven monthspost-enrollment, between March 2004 and February2005. Health Insurance Porta bility and Accountability
Act (HIPAA) rules introduced during the study requiredchanges in the consent process for administrative dataanalysis: we re-consented willing patients at the seven-month survey.Depression Care Management Protocol
Both patients naturalistically referred to CCM prior toand during the study and patients referred to CCM aspart of the randomized evaluation were followed byDCMs according to the TIDES care manager protocol.The protocol, developed by participating experts andsites, defined patients who had probable major depres-sion (defined as an initial PHQ-9 greater than or equalto 10) as eligible for six months of DCM panel manage-
ment. Patients with subthresh old depression (an initial
PHQ-9 between five and nine) who also had a) a prior
history of depression, or b) dysthymia were also eligible.Patients who entered into me ntal health specialty care
c o u l db ed i s c h a r g e df r o mt h ep a n e la f t e rt h ei n i t i a lassessment and any needed follow-up to ensure success-ful referral. All others were to receive at least four caremanager follow-up calls that included patient self-man-
agement support and PHQ-9 measurement. All panel-
eligible patients were to be called and re-assessed by theDCM at six months. The protocol specified that anypatient not eligible for or who discontinued care man-agement be referred back to the primary care providerwith individualized resource and managementsuggestions.
Power Calculations
Design power calculations indicated that to detect a 50%improvement in anti-depressant prescribing assuming anintra-class correlation coefficient (ICC) of 0.01, and ninesites, with 46 patients per site, the study would haveabout 81% power using a two-sided 5% significancelevel. To allow for 20% attrition, 56 patients needed tobe enrolled from each site. During data collection, new
studies indicated the assumed ICC might have been too
small, so within budgetary limitations, the samplingfrom CCM practices was increased to 386 and non-CCM practices to 375. Post-power calculations showedthat the actual ICC was 0.028 and the within-groupstandard deviation 6.25, su ggesting there was adequate
power (0.96) to detect a 20% difference in anti-depres-sant prescribing between the two study arms, but not
enough power (0.45) to detect a 10% difference. Power
calculations for detecting a difference in depressionsymptom improvement across the two study arms showa posteriori power to detect a 20% difference betweenthe two study arms of between 0.21 and 0.29.
Survey and administrative data measures
Our primary study outcome measure, and the basis for
our power calculations, was receipt of appropriate treat-
ment, a process of care goal that requires less powerthan that required to demonstrate symptom outcomeimprovement. Previous studies [5] had demonstratedprocess/outcome links [34] for collaborative care withChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 4 of 15
appropriate antidepressant use and depression symptom
and quality of life improvements. For this QI study, wetherefore aimed at a sample suitable for showing processchange. We evaluated depression symptoms using thePHQ-9 [33] and quality of life changes using SF36V2[35]. We also assessed physical and emotional healthcare
satisfaction [36]. For evaluation patients whose consent
allowed us access to their electronic medical records, weconstructed adherence measures based on VA adminis-trative databases. For these patients, we measured anti-depressant availability fr o mt h eV AP h a r m a c yB e n e f i t s
Management and mental health specialty visits fromVA ’s Outpatient Care file. We used two measures:
whether a patient had any antidepressant fill at appro-
priate dosage in the seven-month time period, and the
medication possession ratio (MPR) [37]. The MPR isdefined as the proportion of days that patients had anti-depressants in hand during the seven-month time per-iod. We defined receipt of appropriate treatment aseither having an antidepressant fill at or above mini-mum therapeutic dosage and achieving an MPR of 0.8or having four or more mental health specialty visits
[38].
Our covariate measures included baseline measures of
depression symptoms, funct ioning, satisfaction, and
adherence as described above, as well as other variables
hypothesized to affect outcomes. These included dysthy-mia [39], history of medicat ions for bipolar disorder,
anxiety [38], post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) [40],alcohol use [41], and medical co-morbidity [42]. Alter-
natively, we used a slight ly modified version of the
Depression Prognostic Index (DPI) [43].
Evaluation of impacts of clinician early adopter status as
a contextual factorData collection
We trained DCMs to collect registry information on
all patients referred to them and used it to prepare
quarterly reports to regional and site managers. DCMs
entered data, including PHQ-9 results, on each patientreferred to them (including those referred by researchinterviewers) into a Microsoft Excel-based depressionregistry. Care managers recorded, de-identified, andthen transmitted registry data. DCMs transmitted dataon 974 patients between the date of the first PDSAcycle and the end date of the randomized evaluation.
Recorded data included whether the patient had been
naturalistically referred or referred as part of the ran-domized evaluation, and indicated the patient ’s PCC,
but no patient personal health information identifierssuch as age. The project statistician replaced cliniciannames with assigned study co des that linked clinicians
to practice site only, without additional information.Care manager registry-based measures
We used the number of naturalistic referrals ( i.e., those
carried out as part of routine care outside of the rando-mized evaluation) recorded in the registry for each PCC
to characterize
PCC adopter status [20]. We categorized
these clinicians into four groups, based on number of
referrals to CCM. We designated clinicians who neverchose to refer outside of the randomized evaluation ashaving a low predilection to adopt the model (no refer-rals). We classified clinicians with one to four referralsas CCM slow adopters, and over five referrals as CCMearly adopters. We classified clinicians who had chosen
to make more than ten referrals as habitual CCM users.
These cut-points reflect the distribution of the variableas well as the clinical judgment that five referrals pro-vide substantial experience a nd ten referrals indicates
that referral has become the PCC’s routine.
We used the registry results to identify both rando-
mized evaluation and natura listically referred patients
eligible for panel management per the TIDES care man-
ager protocol. We also defined adequate care manager
follow-up of panel-eligible patients based on the TIDESDCM protocol for follow-up, such that, for example, apatient who required four DCM follow-up visits wasjudged as having adequate care if the registry reportedfour DCM visits during which a PHQ-9 wasadministered.
Data analysis
Randomized evaluation
We weighted all analyses to control for potential enroll-
ment bias based on age and gender using administrativedata on the approached population [34,44]. Weweighted the analyses for attrition on baseline depres-sion symptoms and functional status. We adjusted forpossible clustering of data by site within region. Statisti-
cal analyses used STATA 10.0 [45] and SPSS 15.0 [46].
We also controlled for variation in elapsed time frombaseline to follow-up surveys by including a variableindicating the number of days between the baseline andfollow-up surveys.
We compared patient characteristics in CCM and
non-CCM practices using t-tests for continuous vari-ables and chi-square tests for categorical variables. For
multivariate outcome analyses, we used generalized esti-mating equations (GEE) to assess the impact of CCMintervention at seven months after the baseline withrepeated measures at the patient level, two records perperson (pre- and post-intervention periods) [47]. Theeffect of the intervention was assessed by the interactionterm of the indicator of post-time period and the indica-tor of the intervention group. We did not conduct
three-level analyses that treated region as a blockingChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 5 of 15
factor and examined CCM at the site level because we
had only one usual care site per region. For continuousdependent variables (such as PHQ-9 score), we used theGEE model with the normal distribution and an identitylink function. For dichotom ous dependent variables
(such as the indicator of adequate dosage of antidepres-
sant use), we use the GEE model with a binomial distri-
bution and a logit link function. For all the GEE models,we used the exchangeable correlation option to accountfor the correlation at the patient and clinic level. Wecompared CCM to non-CCM patient outcomes usingtwo analytical models. In the first model, we includedall covariates as individual variables. In the secondmodel, we included only the DPI. Because the results
were similar, we used the DPI model.
Care manager registry analysis
We used chi-square to assess the relationships between
provider referral type and adequate care manager fol-low-up. We used one-way ANOVA to assess PHQ-9 dif-ference scores with Scheffe post-hoc comparisons toshow which level of follow-up by DCMs had the stron-gest relationships with PHQ-9 outcomes.
Results
Figure 1 shows patient enrollment in the randomizedevaluation. 10, 929 primary care patients were screenedfor depression, with 1, 313 patients scoring 10 or moreon the PHQ-9. A total of 761 completed the baselinesurvey and, of those, 72% (546) completed the seven-month survey. Of those completing the follow-up sur-
vey, 93% (506) consented to have their VA administra-
tive data used for research purposes.
Table 1 compares enrolled EBQI-CCM and non
EBQI-CCM site patients at baseline and shows no sig-nificant differences. Completers of the seven-month sur-vey were not significantly different from non-completerson any of these baseline patient characteristics.
Table 2 shows the depression treatment and patient
outcome results across all patients enrolled in the ran-domized evaluation at seven months. EBQI-CCM sitepatients were significantly more likely to have an ade-q u a t ed o s a g eo fa n t i d e p r e s s ant prescribed than were
non-EBQI-CCM patients (65.7% for EBQI-CCM versus43.4% for non-EBQI CCM, p < 0.01). They were alsosignificantly more likely to have filled an antidepressantprescription (MPR > 0). Completion of full appropriate
care within the seven-month follow-up period, however,
either through completion of appropriate antidepres-sants or psychotherapy, was not different between thegroups. There was also no significant EBQI-CCM/nonEBQI-CCM difference in terms of depression symptoms,functioning, or satisfaction with care. In exploratorymultivariable regression resu lts predicting seven-month
PHQ-9 scores, EBQI-CCM also showed no significanteffect on symptom outcomes. Significant predictors ofseven-month PHQ-9 scores were the DPI prognosticindex, baseline PHQ-9, and VA administrative region.
Effects of context: adherence to CMM protocols among
randomized evaluation patients
Evaluation of adherence to CCM protocols showed
delays in contacting and initiating treatment amongpatients referred by the study. Care managers initiatedpatient contact an average of 47 days after referralamong randomized evaluation patients, and initiatedtreatment an average of 16 days after first contact (notshown).
Figure 2 shows that among the 386 randomized eva-
luation patients referred for care management, 241(62%) had an initial clinical assessment by the DCM and145 (38%) did not. Among the 241 patients assessed,230 (95%) were eligible for care manager panel manage-ment per protocol, while 11(5%) were referred back tothe primary care clinician with management suggestionsonly because they had PHQ-9s less than ten, no priorhistory of depression and no dysthymia. Among the 230
eligible for panel management, 187 (81%) completed the
six month care manager assessment. Overall, consider-ing the entire group of referred patients, 232 (60%) didnot receive adequate care manager follow-up per theTIDES protocol. In addition to the 145 patients withoutan initial DCM clinical assessment, 87 (36%) of the 241eligible patients did not receive adequate care managerfollow-up (not shown).
Effects of context: EBQI
All regions and target practices carried out priority set-ting followed by PDSA cycles and design and implemen-tation of CCM. CCM as implemented included allaspects of the Chronic Illness Care model [48], including:redesign (hiring and training of a care manager); infor-mation technology (electronic consult and note tracking)
[27-29]; education and deci sion support (care manager
registries, standardized electronic assessment and follow-
up notes, clinician pocket cards, educational sessions,academic detailing) [24,25]; collaboration with mentalhealth specialty for education, emergencies, and caremanager supervision [31]; identification of communityand local resources; and patient self-management sup-port. More detailed results can be found elsewhere
[11,19]. Regions and practi ces varied, however, in the
extent of leadership, staff, and clinician involvement [49].
Effects of context: clinician adopter status
Table 3 shows the effects of clinician adopter status on
patient completion of adequate care manager follow-upwithin the randomized evaluation. The patients in thistable include the 241 random ized evaluation patientsChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 6 of 15
who had an initial care manager clinical assessment at
baseline (Figure 2).
Among the 241, 71% (41 of 58) of patients of CCM
habitual users (making 10 or more referrals), 78% (42 of54) of patients of CCM early adopters (making 5 to 9referrals), 64% (36 of 56) of patients of CCM slow adop-ters, and 48% (35 of 73) of patients of clinicians with alow predilection to adopt CCM, received adequate care
manager follow-up (p = 0.003). Results were similar if
we conducted the analyses on the full population of 3867 CCM Practices
14,862 Patient Telephone 
Numbers Collected 
5,602 Patients screened for depression x5,013 Sampling criteria 
met: Telephone numbers 
not used 
x699 Unreachable :
 Maximum call attempts  
x3,154 Refused
x669 Ineligible*x3,080 Sampling criteria 
met: Telephone numbers 
not used 
x645 Unreachable :
 Maximum call attempts  
x3,485 Refused
x800 Ineligible*3 Non-CCM Practices
13,612 Patient Telephone 
Numbers Collected 
5,327 Patients screened for depression 10 VA Primary Care 
Practices  Randomized 
689 Patients eligible: PHQ-9 > 10 624 Patients eligible: PHQ-9 > 10 
x288 Refused enrollment 
after taking PHQ-9 
x15 Acutely Suicidal x235 Refused enrollment 
after taking PHQ-9 
x14 Acutely Suicidal 
386 Completed Baseline Survey  375 Completed Baseline Survey 
x32 Non-working/wrong telephone numbers 
x19 Unreachable: Maximum call attempts 
x4 Deceased  
x7 Too ill 
x36 Refused 7 Month 
Survey x40 Non-working/wrong 
telephone numbers 
x29 Unreachable: Maximum call attempts 
x6 Deceased  
x7 Too ill 
x35 Refused 7 Month 
Survey 
288 Complete PAQ-7 Month Survey 
x20 Did not give consent to use administrative data 258 Complete PAQ-7 Month Survey 
x20 Did not give consent to 
use administrative data 
268 Complete PAQ-7 Month Survey and had 
Administrative Data 238 Complete PAQ-7 Month Survey and had Administrative Data
*Ineligible at baseline refers to those who were deceased, too ill, institutionalized, or had cognitive, 
language or hearing problems 
Figure 1 Sampling flow chart .Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 7 of 15
Table 1 Self-reported characteristics at baseline of randomized evaluation-enrolled patients in EBQI-CCM versus non
EBQI-CCM sites
Baseline patient characteristics EBQI-CCM
(N = 288)Non EBQI-CCM
(N = 258)P-value
Age-mean (SD) 64.0 (12.4) 64.4 (12.7) 0.73
% Male (gender) 95.8 96.5 0.62
% white 86.2 88.1 0.53
% married 63.9 63.9 0.99
Education 0.36
% < high school 11.5 14.6
% high school or more 88.5 85.4
Employment 0.81
% Working 14.8 14.1
% not working/on disability/retired/other 85.2 85.9
Region
% A 32.5 34.6 0.63
% B 36.2 34.7 0.72
% C 31.2 30.7 0.90
Seattle comorbidity index417.50 (3.3) 7.65 (3.4) 0.61
% 3 chronic conditions or more 16.6 12.7 0.22
% Current PTSD 50.9 49.1 0.62
Alcohol use (AUDIT_C)
0 57.6 54.1 0.70
1 to 3 22.5 23.3
4 to 12 19.9 22.5
%≥2 VA mental health visits (past 6 months) 27.0 26.3 0.85
% Poor health status 46.9 41.0 0.19
% Satisfied or very satisfied w/mental health care 62.4 67.2 0.27
Total social support - mean (SD) 2.27 (1.2) 2.32 (1.7) 0.64
Adjusted for population weights. N.S. = not significant at p < 0.05 level. Total social support - lower is more supportive
Table 2 Depression treatment and outcomes comparing EBQI-CCM site patients with non EBQI-CCM site patients at
baseline and seven months
Baseline Seven months
EBQI-
CCMNon EBQI-
CCMDifference EBQI-
CCMNon EBQI-
CCMDifference
Clinical care (administrative data) (N = 268) (N = 238) (N = 268) (N = 238)
Adequate dosage of antidepressant prescribed within 7 months post
baseline (%)49.6 41.5 8.1* 65.7 43.4 22.3**
Medication possession ratio > 0 (%) 52 43 9 67 45 22*
Completion of appropriate care (MPR > 0.8 or completion of 4+therapy visits) (%)38.0 34.9 3.1 47.1 41.9 5.2
Symptoms and functioning (survey data) (N = 288) (N = 258) (N = 288) (N = 258)
Depression symptom severity (mean PHQ-9 score)†(SD) 15.5 (4.4) 15.7 (4.7) -0.2 11.5 (6.5) 11.6 (6.7) -0.1
Patients below threshold for major depression (% PHQ-9 < 10) 0 0 0 39.9 41.4 -1.5
Physical functional status (mean SF-12 role physical score)††(SD) 29.2 (36.2) 34.8 (40.7) -5.6* 32.6 (39.4) 34.1 (35.6) -1.5
Emotional functional status (mean SF-12 role emotional score)††(SD) 47.1 (41.4) 50.0 (41.8) -2.9 49.9 (49.3) 50.0 (41.5) -0.1
Satisfaction with Mental Health Care (% somewhat or very satisfied)††67.2 62.4 4.8 69.1 71.2 -2.1
Means, SDs and percentages are unadjusted. Analyses were weighted for enrollment bias and attrition.
*=p<0 . 0 5** = p < 0.01
†Lower score is better
††Higher score is better.Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 8 of 15
randomized evaluation patients referred to care manage-
ment, and assigned those not reached by DCMs as not
receiving adequate follow-up (p = 0.03 for the parallel
comparison), or if we restricted the analyses to the 230
of 241 randomized evaluation patients who were eligible
for panel management based on a baseline PHQ-9 by
the DCM that showed probable major depression (p =
0.01).Effects of Context: Adherence to protocol among
randomized evaluation versus naturalistically referred
patients
Figure 2 suggests that EBQ I-CCM was used differently
under naturalistic provider-referred than under rando-
mized evaluation-referred conditions, including differ-
ences in delays and rates of completion for baseline
DCM assessment, types of patients referred and rates of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 7 VA Primary Care CCM 
Practices    
590 Patients Naturalistically 
Referred to Depression Care 
Manager (DCM)  
285 Eligible for DCM Panel Management Per Protocol 
 230 Eligible for DCM Panel Management Per Protocol 
193 Completed DCM 6 Month Assessment 187 Completed DCM 6 Month Assessment 119 were not assessed by the DCM 
 80 Unable to Contact 
 17 Refused 
 1 Cancelled by PCP 
 4 followed in MH Specialty Clinic  
 2 Already in Research Cohort 
 5 Too Impaired, 1 Died 
 9 No Data 
 
 145 were not assessed by the DCM  
 34 Unable to Contact 
 12 Refused 
 63 Followed in MH Specialty 
Clinic  
 1 Too Impaired 
 35 No Data 
92  did not complete final 6 month DCM 
follow -up assessment  
 
 69 declined follow-up or could not be 
reached  
 20 lost during DCM turnover 
 3 Died  43 did not complete final 6 month 
DCM follow -up assessment 
  
 38 declined or could not be reached 
 3 lost during DCM turnover 
 2 Died 386 Patients Referred by 
Research Protocol to 
Depression Care Manager 
380 Patients Total Completed DCM 6 Month Assessment 471 were assessed by the 
DCM  
 46 did not need DCM 
panel management per 
protocol 
 14 refused panel 
management 
 20 couldn’t be reached 
after multiple attempts 
 3 died  
 103 dropped out (unclear 
why) 
 6 No data 241 were assessed by the 
DCM 
 11 did not need DCM 
panel management per 
protocol (PHQ- 9 <10, 
no prior history , not 
dysthymic) 
Figure 2 Naturalistic and evaluation-enrolled collaborative care patient flow chart .Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 9 of 15
completion of the DCM six month follow-up assess-
ment. Among 976 total patients (randomized evaluation
plus naturalistically referred) entered into the care man-
ager registry preceding and during the evaluation enroll-ment period, 386 (40%) were referred through therandomized evaluation pr ocess and 590 (60%) were
referred naturalistically. Among the 386 randomizedevaluation-based referrals, 62% (241) completed a base-line assessment. Among the 590 naturalistic referrals,
80% (471) completed a baseline DCM assessment (p <
0.001 for differences in assessment). Compared to the
average elapsed time of 47 days from referral to caremanagers ’patient contact initiation for randomized eva-
luation patients, naturalistic referrals were contacted inan average of 15 days (p < 0.001 for differences indelays). Once assessed by the DCM, a greater propor-tion of randomized evaluation than of naturalisticallyreferred patients were assessed as eligible for DCM
panel management (230 of 241, or 95% of randomized
evaluation patients compared to 285 of 471, or 61% ofnaturalistically referred patients (p < .0001 for differ-ences in eligibility). Once enrolled in panel managementrandomized evaluation patients were more likely tocomplete the six month DCM follow-up assessment.Among the 230 randomized evaluation patients eligiblefor panel management, 187 (81%) completed a six
month care manager assessment. Among the 285 natur-
alistically referred patients who were eligible for panelmanagement, 193 (68%) completed a six month caremanager assessment (p < . 0005 for differences in six
month assessments).We found that CCM offered as a voluntary referral
service to PCCs was heavily used by some clinicians and
rarely used by others (not shown). Naturalistically
referred patients came predominantly from early adop-ters and habitual users, while research-referred, rando-mized evaluation-enrolled patients reflected the full
distribution of clinician adopter levels. For example,among the 386 randomized evaluation-enrolled patientsreferred for care management, 27.2% came from clini-cians who had referred 10 or more patients to CCM
(habitual users). Among 590 naturalistically referred
patients, 72.5% came from clinicians who were habitualusers of CCM (p < 0.001).
Finally, we assessed the relationship between depres-
sion symptom outcomes and adequate depression caremanager follow-up. We found that 24-week PHQ-9 out-comes were significantly better among patients in EBQI-CCM practices (randomized evaluation referred and nat-
uralistically referred patients combined) who received
adequate care manager follow-up than among thosewho did not based on bivariate regression analysis withPHQ-9 change as the dependent variable (p = 0.001). Asshown in Table 4, this result appears to reflect a doseresponse pattern for care manager visits, with the largestdifference being between those with just baseline and24-week follow-up visits and those with four or more
visits (p < 0.001).
Discussion
This study aimed to determine whether healthcare orga-
nizations could improve depression care quality usingTable 3 Early adopter clinician effects on adequacy of care manager follow-up in EBQI-CCM sites
Patients ’primary care clinicians ’history of early adoption of
collaborative care management (CCM)EBQI-CCM site patients enrolled in the randomized evaluation and
recorded in the care manager quality improvement registry*, **
(N = 241)
Patient received adequate
care manager follow-upPatient did not receive adequate
care manager follow-upTotal
N (%) N (%) N
(%)
Evaluation-enrolled patients of 21 EBQI-CCM site clinicians with low
predilection to adopt CCM (made no referrals)(34.4% of study clinicians)35 (47.9) 38 (52.1) 73
(100)
Evaluation-enrolled patients of 17 EBQI-CCM slow CCM adopterclinicians (made 1 to 4 referrals) (27.9% of study clinicians)36 (64.3) 20 (35.7) 56
(100)
Evaluation-enrolled patients of 11 early CCM adopter clinicians (made5 to 9 referrals) (18.0% of study clinicians)42 (77.8) 12 (22.2) 54
(100)
Evaluation-enrolled patients of 12 habitual user clinicians (made 10 ormore referrals) (19.7% of study clinicians)41 (70.7) 17 (29.3) 58
(100)
Total (evaluation-enrolled patients of all 61 clinicians) 154 (63.9) 87 (36.1) 241
(100)
*The quality improvement registry includes both a) patients enrolled in the randomized evaluation and referred to CCM by researchers and b) naturalistically
referred patients. The registry records all visits for patients experiencing CCM. Only patients enrolled in the randomized evaluation who also are listed in the
registry (and thus have data on CCM visits) are included in these analyses.
** p = 0.003 comparing adequate care manager follow-up by type of clinician, with the difference between clinicians with low predilection to adopt CCM and all
others showing the greatest difference (Scheffe test)Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 10 of 15
EBQI for adapting CCM to local and organizational
context [8-11]. This multi-level research/clinical partner-ship approach called for systematic adaptation of pre-viously-tested, effective CCM for depression [4-7], andfor focusing on the key aspects of the Chronic Illness
Care Model ( i.e., patient self-management support, deci-
sion support, delivery syste m design, and clinical infor-
mation systems) [48]. Researchers served as technical
experts rather than decision makers or implementers.To rigorously and formatively evaluate EBQI-CCM earlyin its life cycle in VA, we used cluster randomized trialmethodology powered to detect changes in the process,but not outcomes, of care. Our answer regarding
whether healthcare organizations can use EBQI methods
to improve depression care is mixed in that EBQI-CCMshowed improvements in process (antidepressant use)while not demonstrating outcome improvements.
Unlike our answer regarding the effectiveness of
EBQI-CCM, our answer regarding the usefulness of ran-domized trials for formative evaluation is strongly posi-tive. The trial was relatively inexpensive ($750, 000)
relative to system costs for fully implementing CCM
nationally; identified the need to improve the EBQI-CCM model; and provided critical information on howto improve it. Information on issues raised by this trial,such as care manager workload, follow-up, access, andclinician effects on patient outcomes, is essential if theresults of over 35 CCM randomized trials are to bereplicated in routine care.
To understand study results, we evaluated adherence
to the study intervention plans. In this study, the inves-tigators implemented EBQI, rather than CCM itself;engaged sites implemented CCM. In terms of overalladherence to EBQI methods, our approach engagedregional and local leaders effectively in guiding local QIteams through PDSA cycles for designing and imple-menting CCM. All participating practices implemented
and maintained EBQI-CCM throughout the study. In
terms of adherence to CCM, as implemented by regio-nal and local leaders with EBQI support, QI data [11]showed that EBQI-CCM incorporated the key featuresidentified in the published CCM literature [50] in termsof patient education and activation [26,51], caremanagement follow-up, systematically assessed symp-toms, and collaboration between primary care providers,care managers, and mental health specialists [31,32].Adherence to the TIDES DCM protocol for promptnessand completion of all required clinical assessments for
individual randomized evaluation patients, however, was
problematic.
Despite the identified problems with completion of
assessments, the EBQI-CCM site patients were pre-
scribed antidepressants at appropriate doses significantlym o r eo f t e nt h a nt h o s ei nn o nE B Q I - C C Mp r a c t i c e s( a23% difference). EBQI-CCM site patients similarly hadsignificantly more prescriptions actually filled (a 22% dif-
ference). Prior studies of CQI or lower-intensity EBQI
for depression in primary care have not shownimproved prescribing [8,14,15]. Increased antidepressantuse, however, did not translate into robust improve-ments in depression symptoms, functional status, orsatisfaction with care in intent to treat analyses.
Because we aimed for the most efficient use of study
resources for evaluating the process and effectiveness of
an implementation method, rather than the effectiveness
of CCM, we predicated our design on the lower samplesize required for assessing a key process of care (antide-pressant use) rather than the more demanding samplesize needed for assessing effects on patient symptomoutcomes. Our power to detect a 20% difference indepression symptoms was only between 0.21 and 0.29,based on the obtained sample size and ICC. We thus
cannot definitively say tha t depression symptom out-
comes did not improve within the timeframe studied.
We were, however, disappointed in the lack of robustsymptom impacts, and sought to determine more expli-citly what lessons readers should take away from ourwork.
To place our findings in context, we first asked: Do
our randomized evaluation results test the effectiveness
of CCM as a model? We conclude they do not. Other
CCM studies have tested the CCM model as implemen-ted using designs with higher researcher control, andshown effectiveness in diverse healthcare sites [4-7].These studies, however, did not test self-implementationof CCM by healthcare practices or sites using QITable 4 Number of depression care manager visits versus change in patient PHQ-9 depression scores
Depression care manager visits during which a PHQ-9 was administered** PHQ-9 score mean change
(lower is better)95% confidence intervals
(a) Baseline and 24 week only (2 total) (n = 95) -3.83 -5.10, -2.56
(b) Baseline, 24 week, and one additional (3 total) (n = 120) -6.94 -8.09, -5.79
(c) Baseline, 24 week, and two to four additional (4 to 6 total) (n = 163) -8.45 -9.49, -7.41
Based on Care Manager Quality Improvement Registry Data. Total n = 378 representing those clinician- and research-referred patients finishing panel
management (380, Fig. 2) minus two clinician-referred patients who completed the 24 week DCM follow-up visit but did not have a 24 week DCM PHQ-9
recorded. Significance levels are p < 0.001 comparing the PHQ-9 change for group (a) to group (c); p = 0.003 comparing group (a) to group (b); and p = 0.16
comparing group (b) to group (c).Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 11 of 15
methods. For example, meta-analyses on the effective-
ness of the CCM model [4-6] exclude prior studies ofQI methods for implementing CCM [8,14,15], recogniz-ing that these studies address a different question. Ourrandomized evaluation results test the ability of health-care organizations and sites to adapt and implement
research-designed CCM as a part of their organizational
cultures and structures. In so doing, the results provideinformation for improvement. Because typical healthcareorganizations or practices must use QI methods toadopt research-based depression care models, the chal-lenges faced by this study are likely to be relevant tomanagers, policymakers, an d researchers interested in
improving depression care at a system or organizational
level.
Our goal of combing a randomized evaluation with QI
methods resulted in challenges related to timing. Our
fixed windows for baseline and follow-up surveys meantthat delays in initiation of care management for study
patients, followed by lags in PCC ordering of treatments,were not accommodated in assessing outcomes. Thus,for many patients, antidepressant treatment or psy-
chotherapy began only a short time before the seven-
month follow-up survey. Furthermore, while 81% of ran-domized evaluation patients eligible for panel manage-ment completed the six month DCM assessment, manyfewer had completed the designated number of follow-up contacts by that time. These results highlight thechallenges for researchers in timing outcome measuresrelative to patient access to CCM in a study with a rig-
orous randomized design but low researcher control of
the intervention.
Excessive demand for care management proved to be
another challenge, and one that is potentially relevant toCCM program managers. While we did not intend tooverload care managers, we inadvertently did. As origin-ally envisioned, the randomized evaluation would havebegun after EBQI-CCM practices had completed a small
number of PDSA cycles of the CCM intervention invol-
ving as few as ten and no more than fifty total patients.Under this scenario, care managers could have coveredboth naturalistic referrals and randomized evaluationreferrals, given typical care manger caseloads [52]. Inreality, the requirements o f eight separate IRBs, faced
with an unfamiliar implementation research model andwith the introduction of HIPAA [53], led to a prolonged
period between start of naturalistic PDSA intervention
development and start of the randomized evaluation (agap per intervention practice of between 111 and 334days with a mean of 263 days). The study team discov-ered that it was not feasible, under QI conditions, toturn off naturalistic referrals. Thus, care manager case-loads were full with naturalis tically referred patients
prior to the start of the randomized evaluation.Our study mimicked a potential organizational policy
such that patients screening positive for depressionwould be automatically referred to CCM, along withpatients referred by their PCCs. This scenario representsa potentially realistic policy in VA in particular, becauseroutine depression screening is already mandated. Our
results show that implementing effective follow-up of
primary care-detected depression for all eligible patientswill be challenging.
Few previous studies of CCM have tested reach [54]
or the degree to which all eligible individuals in a givenclinical setting can have access to the CCM model.Most previous CCM randomi zed trials have limited
total patient access to CCM to patients enrolled in the
trial, thus artificially controlling demand. Care manager
caseload capacity [52] bounds effective reach under nat-uralistic conditions. Our study ratio of approximatelyone care manager per 10, 000 primary care patients mayneed to be adjusted or ameliorated by other depressioncare redesigns.
Looking within the randomized evaluation and its
patients, we found unanticipated associations between
patient outcomes and whether the PCC they belonged
to was an early adopter of CCM. Patients referred toCCM by the study team, but whose PCC was an earlyCCM adopter [20], were significantly more likely to beassessed by care managers and to receive adequate caremanager follow-up than other patients, independent ofpatient depression severity or comorbidities. Theseresults suggest that patient access to full CCM care was
shaped more by who their provider was than by patient
need.
We think the clinician effects we observed are likely to
substantially affect CCM models under naturalistic con-ditions. Clinician effects did not influence patient enroll-ment in the study. No clinicians in these practicesrefused to have their patients referred to CCM by studypersonnel, and the proportions of randomized evalua-
tion patients belonging to early adopter clinicians versus
those with a low predilection to adopt the model mir-rored the proportions of clinicians who fell into thesecategories in the study practices.
Clinician predispositio n to adopt CCM affects use of
the model under naturalisti c conditions in another way
as well. In essence, patients of early adopter clinicianstend to monopolize the DCM resource. For example,
73% of naturalistically referred patients belonged to clin-
icians who habitually used CCM (ten or more naturalis-tic referrals), while only 27% of randomized evaluationpatients belonged to this type of clinician. Registry dataon patients naturalistically referred to CCM shows thesame pattern we saw in data from the randomized eva-luation; the quality of CCM care is better amongpatients of early adopter clinicians [11]. Differential useChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 12 of 15
of and benefits from CCM resources based on clinician
characteristics should be taken into account both ininterpreting studies of CCM and in implementing CCMas routine care.
Theories of social justice and mental health parity
would argue that patient nee d, rather than clinician
characteristics, should govern access to clinicalresources. Our results emphasize the importance ofactive PCC engagement in CCM, a topic not addressedin most prior CCM research, though identified as issueby prior qualitative work on the TIDES program [49].Clinician effects may be mediated by, for example, moreeffective encouragement to patients about participating,and greater promptness in responding to care manager
suggestions about ordering t reatment. These activities
might in turn be moderated by differences in clinician
knowledge and attitudes about depression and/orgreater experience in using CCM. Monitoring of clini-cian effects on use of CCM (and potentially other men-tal health services) is critical for CCM programs, andbetter methods for bringing all clinicians in line withthe early adopters are needed [55].
There are reasons to collect program evaluation data
other than testing program efficacy or effectiveness. Wethink CCM programs should monitor patient outcomesusing a registry, as was done in this study, for purposesof monitoring program utility and safety. Unlike ourrandomized evaluation resu lts, our pre-post care man-
ager registry data reflects how the program functionsnaturalistically. These naturalistic data, while not testing
model effectiveness, show that CCM as implemented in
these VA sites performed safely, and with outcomes thatmet or exceeded CCM targets for patients whose clini-cians chose to refer them.
We used our registry data as well as our randomized
trial data to shape and improve EBQI-CCM. As reportedelsewhere [11,19], registry results on naturalisticallyreferred patients show that: 82% of 208 were treated for
depression in primary care without specialty referral;
74% stayed on medication for the recommended time;and 90% of primary care managed patients and 50% ofmental health specialty managed patients had clinicallysignificant reductions in depressive symptomatology(PHQ-9 scores < 10) at six months. On average, PHQ-9scores improved nine points; improvement remainedsignificant controlling for depression severity and com-
plexity. While subject to selection bias, these results
showed potential benefit of the program for diversepatients. If the results had been different, such as show-ing little or no symptom improvement or raising safetyconcerns, we would have considered stopping or fullyredesigning the program. Instead, our follow-up PDSAcycles focused on reducing patient and clinicianselection effects while continuing to monitor patientoutcomes.
Our comparison of registry data with rigorous study
data is encouraging regarding the validity of registrydata for depression progra m monitoring purposes.
Although we would not have discovered the effects of
clinician adopter status based on registry data, because
of the few included patients belonging to low adopterclinicians, we can replicate this clinician effect in retro-spect through the registry. Other major context effectsdemonstrated by the randomized experiment, includingeffects of patient complexity, can also be observedthrough the registry data, s upporting its validity. Per
protocol analysis (looking only at patients who received
full CCM) of symptom and functional status outcomes
for randomized evaluation patients was consistent withregistry results in terms of the level of outcomeimprovement observed, providing qualitative triangula-tion on the importance of ensuring patient completionof CCM as a critical target for improvement. We con-clude that registry data on patient care and symptomoutcomes can be accurate enough for program monitor-
ing, with appropriate attention to selection bias and care
manager training on data collection.
Registry data has limitations in addition to its inability
to provide fully representative data. We know that regis-try patients were selected and not representative of alleligible patients. In addition, care managers, thoughextensively trained, may have been less objective or con-sistent in their administration of the PHQ-9 than were
external data collectors.
One of the explicit goals of the TIDES program was to
develop a CCM model that could be spread nationally in
VA [56]. In terms of this goal, the randomized evalua-tion of EBQI reported here informed the ongoing QI
and model spread process for TIDES. For example, theissues with differential PCC involvement led to systema-tic training and engagement approaches on a national
basis [56]. As it improved, the TIDES program became
one of the bases for the Veterans Health Administration(VHA) Primary Care-Mental Health Integration(PC-MHI) initiative [57-59] and is codified in the VHA’ s
Uniform Mental Health Services Package directive [60].EBQI thus seems to be an effective method for design-ing a program that sustains and spreads. Data from therandomized evaluation reported here, however, indicate
that ensuring that the sustained, spread programs pro-
duced by EBQI achieve comparative effectiveness on apopulation basis is also criti cal. Ongoing national eva-
luation of primary care-mental health integration in VAhas the potential to achieve this goal.
This study has limitations . The study focused on a
single healthcare system (the VA), and on non-Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 13 of 15
academic, small to medium-sized practices, almost a
third of which were rural [21]. Results may not be gen-eralizable to other systems or practice types. Second,
our study ’s power to detect symptom outcomes was lim-
ited by our follow-up window of seven months. Forsome patients, delays in access to care managers and
thus in treatment initiation may have limited the possi-
bilities for completing treatment within the study win-dow. Third, we were not able to confirm registry dataon care manager visits by analysis of administrative datab e c a u s eas p e c i f i ce n c o u n t e rc o d ef o rd e p r e s s i o nc a r emanagement was not introduced by the VA until afterthis study. Fourth, use of consecutive sampling over-represents more frequent users of primary care relative
to the full population of visiting patients [61]. Finally,
our process evaluation subgroup analyses on early adop-ters are not appropriate for drawing conclusions about
causality or the overall effectiveness of EBQI-CCM.Selection bias, in particular, cannot be eliminated as afactor in these analyses.
In summary, this study showed that CCM, as imple-
mented using EBQI, improved antidepressant prescrib-
ing across a representative sample of patients attending
study practices. While this randomized evaluation does
not test the effectiveness of CCM as an ideal model, itdoes test the effectiveness of CCM as designed andimplemented in VA using QI methods, albeit early inthe program ’s lifespan. The study encountered a number
of difficulties likely to apply to other healthcare organi-zations implementing CCM as routine care, including
the consequences of care manager overload and of dif-ferential PCC adoption of CCM. The lack of robustpatient symptom improvement for the experimentalgroup compared to usual care points to the importanceof continuously monitoring and improving CCM pro-grams during and after imple mentation. Otherwise, the
cost-effectiveness benefits promised by CCM studies willnot be achieved in reality.
Acknowledgements
Funding was provided by Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) HealthServices Research and Development (HSR&D) Service (grant number MHI-99-375). The VA HSR&D Mental Health Quality Enhancement Research Initiative(QUERI) staff provided critical assistance and oversight. Dr. Yano ’s salary
support during a portion of this work was provided by a VA HSR&DResearch Career Scientist award (grant number RCS 09-095). We would liketo specifically acknowledge the contributions of Laura Bonner, DuncanCampbell, Jonathan Kanter, Debbie Mittman, Carol Oken, Carol Simons,Susan Vivell and all other WAVES project research staff. The study would nothave been possible without the active partnership and leadership of RandyPetzel, Scott Ober, Kathy Henderson, Joanne Kirchner, Mike Davies, and all
other participating administrators and clinicians of VA VISNs 10, 16, and 23.
Finally we thank VA Nursing Service and more specifically Karen Vollen andBarbara Revay, pioneering TIDES DCMs and the first TIDES nurse trainers.There are no contractual rights to review the manuscript before submission,but there is a requirement that Health Services Research and Development,Department of Veterans Affairs, be given a copy of the accepted manuscriptbefore publication. The views expressed herein are those of the authors anddo not necessarily represent the views of the Department of Veterans Affairsand other affiliated institutions.
Author details
1Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, School of Medicine,
University of Washington, Seattle Washington, USA.2VA Center for the Study
of Healthcare Provider Behavior, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System,
Los Angeles, California, USA.3RAND Health Program, Santa Monica,
California, USA.4David Geffen School of Medicine and School of Public
Health, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.
5HSR&D Northwest Center of Excellence for Outcomes Research in Older
Adults, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington, USA.
6Department of Human Development, Washington State University,
Vancouver, Washington, USA.7VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle,
Washington, USA.
Authors ’contributions
EC, LR, CL, EY, BS, and BF substantially contributed to the conception and
design. CB, ML, AL, and JU contributed to the analysis and interpretation of
the data. All authors were involved in drafting the manuscript and/or
critically revising it. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 24 November 2009 Accepted: 27 October 2011
Published: 27 October 2011
References
1. Broadhead WE, et al:Depression, disability days, and days lost from work
in a prospective epidemiologic survey. JAMA 1990, 264(19) :2524-8.
2. Hirschfeld RM, et al:Social functioning in depression: a review. J Clin
Psychiatry 2000, 61(4) :268-75.
3. Mintz J, et al:Treatments of depression and the functional capacity to
work. Arch Gen Psychiatry 1992, 49(10) :761-8.
4. Williams JW Jr, et al:Systematic review of multifaceted interventions to
improve depression care. Gen Hosp Psychiatry 2007, 29(2) :91-116.
5. Gilbody S, et al:Collaborative care for depression: a cumulative meta-
analysis and review of longer-term outcomes. Arch Intern Med 2006,
166(21) :2314-21.
6. Gilbody S, et al:Educational and organizational interventions to improve
the management of depression in primary care: a systematic review.
JAMA 2003, 289(23) :3145-51.
7. Gilbody S, Bower P, Whitty P: Costs and consequences of enhanced
primary care for depression: systematic review of randomised economicevaluations. Br J Psychiatry 2006, 189:297-308.
8. Rubenstein LV, et al:Impacts of evidence-based quality improvement on
depression in primary care: a randomized experiment. J Gen Intern Med
2006, 21(10) :1027-35.
9. Shojania KG, Grimshaw JM: Evidence-based quality improvement: the
state of the science. Health Aff (Millwood) 2005, 24(1) :138-50.
10. Yano EM, et al:Targeting Primary Care Referrals to Smoking Cessation
Clinics Does Not Improve Quit Rates: Implementing Evidence-Based
Interventions into Practice. Health Serv Res 2008.
11. Rubenstein LV, et al:Using evidence-based quality improvement
methods for translating depression collaborative care research into
practice. Fam Syst Health 2010, 28(2) :91-113.
12. Deming WE: Out of Crisis. MIT Press (Cambridge, MA) 1986.
13. Eppen Gd, Gould FJ, Schmidt CP: Introductory Management Science.
Prentice-Hall, Inc, New Jersey; 1987.
14. Goldberg HI, et al:A
randomized controlled trial of CQI teams and
academic detailing: can they alter compliance with guidelines? Jt Comm
J Qual Improv 1998, 24(3) :130-42.
15. Solberg LI, et al:A CQI intervention to change the care of depression: a
controlled study. Eff Clin Pract 2001, 4(6):239-49.
16. Parker LE, et al:Balancing participation and expertise: a comparison of
locally and centrally managed health care quality improvement withinprimary care practices. Qual Health Res 2007, 17(9) :1268-79.
17. Rubenstein LV, et al:Understanding team-based quality improvement for
depression in primary care. Health Serv Res 2002, 37(4) :1009-29.Chaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 14 of 15
18. Meredith LS, et al:Implementation and maintenance of quality
improvement for treating depression in primary care. Psychiatr Serv 2006,
57(1) :48-55.
19. Liu CF, et al:Organizational cost of quality improvement for depression
care. Health Serv Res 2009, 44(1) :225-44.
20. Rogers Em: Diffusion of Innovations. New York, The Free Press; 1995.
21. Fickel JJ, et al:Clinic-level process of care for depression in primary care
settings. Adm Policy Ment Health 2009, 36(2) :144-58.
22. Rubenstein LV, et al:Increasing the impact of quality improvement on
health: an expert panel method for setting institutional priorities. Jt
Comm J Qual Improv 1995, 21(8) :420-32.
23. Simon GE, et al:Randomised trial of monitoring, feedback, and
management of care by telephone to improve treatment of depression
in primary care. BMJ 2000, 320(7234) :550-4.
24. Sherman SE, et al:Teaching systems-based practice to primary care
physicians to foster routine implementation of evidence-baseddepression care. Acad Med 2007, 82(2) :168-75.
25. Luck J, et al:A social marketing approach to implementing evidence-
based practice in VHA QUERI: the TIDES depression collaborative caremodel. Implement Sci 2009, 4:64.
26. Greenfield S, Kaplan S, Ware JE Jr: Expanding patient involvement in care.
Effects on patient outcomes. Ann Intern Med 1985, 102(4) :520-8.
27. Chaney E, et al:How Behavioral Healthcare Informatics Systems Interface
with Medical Informatics Systems: A Work in Progress. Edited by: I.N.D. et
al. Information Technology Essentials for Behavioral Health Clinicians,Springer-Verlag, London; 2010:.
28. Bonner LM, et al:’To take care of the patients ’: Qualitative analysis of
Veterans Health Administration personnel experiences with a clinicalinformatics system. Implement Sci 2010, 5:63.
29. Young AS, et al:Information technology to support improved care for
chronic illness. J Gen Intern Med 2007, 22(Suppl 3):425-30.
30. Campbell D, et al:Suicide risk management: development and analysis
of a telephone-based approach to patient safety. Translational Behavioral
Medicine: Practice, Policy, Research 2011.
31. Felker BL, et al:Developing Effective Collaboration Between Primary Care
and Mental Health Providers. Prim Care Companion J Clin Psychiatry 2006,
8(1):12-16.
32. Fickel JJ, et al:Primary care - mental health collaboration: an example of
assessing usual practice and potential barriers. J Interprof Care 2007,
21(2) :207-16.
33. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB: The PHQ-9: validity of a brief
depression severity measure. J Gen Intern Med 2001, 16(9) :606-13.
34. Donabedian A: Explorations in Quality Assessment and Monitoring Vol I:
The Definition of Quality and Approaches to its Assessment. Health
Administration Press; 1980.
35. User ’s Manual for the SF36v2 Health Survey - Second Addition. [http://
www.QualityMetric.com].
36. Sherbourne CD, et al:Long-term effectiveness of disseminating quality
improvement for depression in primary care. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2001,
58(7) :696-703.
37. Jones LE, et al:Nonadherence to depression treatment guidelines among
veterans with diabetes mellitus. Am J Manag Care 2006, 12(12) :701-10.
38. Wells KB, et al:Impact of disseminating quality improvement programs
for depression in managed primary care: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2000, 283(2) :212-20.
39. Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI) Core Version 2.1
Interviewer ’s Manual. World Health Organization: Geneva; 1997.
40. Campbell DG, et al:Prevalence of depression-PTSD comorbidity:
implications for clinical practice guidelines and primary care-based
interventions. J Gen Intern Med 2007, 22(6) :711-8.
41. Bradley KA, et al:Using alcohol screening results and treatment history
to assess the severity of at-risk drinking in Veterans Affairs primary care
patients. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2004, 28(3) :448-55.
42. Fan VS, et al:Validation of case-mix measures derived from self-reports
of diagnoses and health. J Clin Epidemiol 2002, 55(4) :371-80.
43. Rubenstein LV, et al:Predicting outcomes of primary care patients with
major depression: development of a depression prognosis index.
Psychiatr Serv 2007, 58(8) :1049-56.
44. Berinsky AJ: Survey non-response. InThe SAGE handbookof public opinion
research. Edited by: Traugott WDMW. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications;
2008:.45. STATA Corp 2007. Stata Statistical Software: Release 10. College Station,TX: StataCorp LP. 2007.
46. SPSS for Windows. Chicago: SPSS Inc; 2006, Rel. 15.0.
47. Zeger SL, Liang KY: Longitudinal data analysis for discrete and
continuous outcomes. Biometrics 1986, 42(1) :121-30.
48. Wagner EH, et al:Quality Improvement In Chronic Illness Care: A
Collaborative Approach. Joint Commission Journal on Quality Improvement
2001, 27(2) :63-80.
49. Parker LE, et al:Creating a quality-improvement dialogue: utilizing
knowledge from frontline staff, managers, and experts to foster healthcare quality improvement. Qual Health Res 2009, 19(2) :229-42.
50. Rubenstein LV, et al:Determining Key Features of Effective Depression
Interventions. Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Healthcare System/
Southern California/RAND Evidence-based Practice Center 2009.
51. Lorig KR, Sobel DS, et al:Evidence suggesting that a chronic disease self-
management program can improve health status while reducinghospitalization. Medical Care 1999, 5-14.
52. Liu CF, et al:Time allocation and caseload capacity in telephone
depression care management. Am J Manag Care 2007, 13(12) :652-60.
53. Chaney E, et al:Human subjects protection issues in QUERI
implementation research: QUERI Series. Implement Sci 2008, 3:10.
54. Glasgow RE, et al:Evaluating the impact of health promotion programs:
using the RE-AIM framework to form summary measures for decisionmaking involving complex issues. Health Educ Res 2006, 21(5) :688-94.
55. McDaniel RR Jr, Lanham HJ, Anderson RA: Implications of complex
adaptive systems theory for the design of research on health careorganizations. Health Care Manage Rev 2009, 34(3) :191-9.
56. Smith JL, et al:Developing a national dissemination plan for
collaborative care for depression: QUERI Series. Implement Sci 2008, 3:59.
57. Primary Care-Mental Health (PC-MH) Integration Website. [http://vaww4.
va.gov/pcmhi/].
58. Zivin K, et al:Initiation of Primary Care-Mental Health Integration
programs in the VA Health System: associations with psychiatricdiagnoses in primary care. Med Care 2010, 48(9) :843-51.
59. Post EP, et al:Integrating mental health into primary care within the
Veterans Health Administration. Fam Syst Health 2010, 28(2) :83-90.
60. Uniform Mental Health Services Package. , VHA Handbook 1160.01.
61. Lee ML, et al:What patient population does visit-based sampling in
primary care settings represent? Med Care 2002, 40(9) :761-70.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-6-121
Cite this article as: Chaney et al.:Implementing collaborative care for
depression treatment in primary care: A cluster randomized evaluation
of a quality improvement practice redesign. Implementation Science 2011
6:121.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitChaney et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:121
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/121Page 15 of 15
