RESEARCH Open Access
Development of a behaviour change intervention
to increase upper limb exercise in stroke
rehabilitation
Louise A Connell1*, Naoimh E McMahon1, Judith Redfern1, Caroline L Watkins1and Janice J Eng2
Abstract
Background: Two thirds of survivors will achieve independent ambulation after a stroke, but less than half will
recover upper limb function. There is strong evidence to support intensive repetitive task-oriented training for
recovery after stroke. The number of repetitions needed is suggested to be in the order of hundreds, but this is not
currently being achieved in clinical practice. In an effort to bridge this evidence-practice gap, we have developed a
behaviour change intervention that aims to increase provision of upper limb repetitive task-oriented training in
stroke rehabilitation. This paper aims to describe the systematic processes that took place in collaboratively developing
the behaviour change intervention.
Methods: The methods used in this study were not defined a priori but were guided by the Behaviour Change Wheel.
The process was collaborative and iterative with four stages of development emerging (i) establishing an intervention
development group; (ii) structured discussions to understand the problem, prioritise target behaviours and analyse
target behaviours; (iii) collaborative design of theoretically underpinned intervention components and (iv) piloting and
refining of intervention components.
Results: The intervention development group consisted of the research team and stroke therapy team at a local stroke
rehabilitation unit. The group prioritised four target behaviours at the therapist level: (i) identifying suitable patients for
exercises, (ii) provision of exercises, (iii) communicating exercises to family/visitors and (iv) monitoring and reviewing
exercises. It also provides a method for self-monitorin g performance in order to measure fidelity. The developed
intervention, PRACTISE (Promoting Recovery of the Arm: C linical Tools for Intensive Stroke Exercise), consists of
team meetings and the PRACTISE Toolkit (screening tool a nd upper limb exercise plan, PRACTISE exercise pack
and an audit tool).
Conclusions: This paper provides an example of how the Behaviour Change Wheel may be applied in the
collaborative development of a behaviour change intervent ion for health professional s. The process involved was
resource-intensive, and the iterati ve process was difficult to capture. T he use of a published behaviour change
framework and taxonomy will assist repl ication in future research and clinical use. The feasibility and acceptability
of PRACTISE is currently being explored in two other stroke rehabilitation units.
Keywords: Stroke, Upper limb, Behaviour change, Complex intervention, Development
* Correspondence: laconnell@uclan.ac.uk
1Clinical Practice Research Unit, School of Health, University of Central
Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, England
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2015 Connell et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.Connell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 
DOI 10.1186/s13012-015-0223-3
Background
The evidence base for stroke rehabilitation has grown
exponentially in recent years. There is now strong evi-
dence supported by high-quality trials, and underpinned
by motor learning and neuroplasticity literature [1], to
support intensive repetitive task-oriented training for re-
covery after stroke [2]. After a stroke, two thirds of sur-
vivors will achieve independent ambulation but less than
half will recover upper limb function at 6 months [3].
Upper limb impairment after stroke has been shown to
significantly influence quality of life [4] but remains a
critical and neglected area of stroke rehabilitation [5]. A
positive relationship has been found between the time
scheduled for therapy and recovery, suggesting that in-
creased doses of therapy may lead to clinically meaning-
ful improvements [6]. However, the optimal dose of
therapy in stroke rehabilitation is not yet known, with
current guidance recommending that stroke survivors
have as much opportunity as possible to repeatedly prac-
tise upper limb tasks [7]. Neuroplasticity literature sug-
gests that repetitions in the order of hundreds are likely
to be necessary [8] to maximise recovery after stroke.
This contrasts starkly with clinical practice, where it has
been reported that the average amount of time spent
treating the upper limb in therapy sessions is between
0.9 and 7.9 min [9] resulting in, on average, just 32 repe-
titions per session [10].
There exists a clear evidence-practice gap in stroke
rehabilitation with methods to increase the amount of
repetitive task-oriented training for the upper limb ur-
gently needed. GRASP (Graded Repetitive Arm Supple-
mentary Program) is a self-directed arm and hand
exercise programme that was developed by researchers
at the University of British Columbia. It is an evidence-
based intervention that aims to address this gap and
increase the numbers of repetitions that stroke survivors
complete during rehabilitation [11]. The stroke survivor
is taught by a therapist how to complete a range of
upper limb exercises included in the GRASP manual
and then completes the exercises outside of their therapy
time, with the help of a family member or carer where
possible. GRASP has experienced unusually rapid uptake
into clinical practice. For example, despite only being
published in 2009, and not being explicitly recom-
mended in the UK stroke guidelines, approximately 63%
of UK therapists who responded to a survey were aware
of GRASP by 2013, of whom 23% had used GRASP and
11% were regular users [12]. In order to explore the rea-
sons for this rapid uptake, a formative evaluation of the
implementation of GRASP in British Columbia, Canada
was carried out [13]. Therapists working in stroke re-
habilitation reported that key factors in finding out
about the intervention were their own personal networks
with colleagues from academia and clinical practice, andt h ef r e eo n l i n ea v a i l a b i l i t yo fG R A S P .An o t a b l ef i n d i n g
from this evaluation was that although the uptake of
GRASP was good, key components of the intervention
were modified when implemented by therapists in rou-
tine clinical practice. For example, GRASP was pro-
vided to non-stroke patients (e.g. spinal cord injury,
brain injury patients); the exercises were often provided
separately as opposed to providing the full manual, and
the dose, when monitored, was less than the recom-
mended amount.
Low implementation fidelity has been reported in pre-
vious trials in stroke rehabilitation, e.g. the training care-
givers after stroke (TRACS) trial [14]. This was a cluster
randomised controlled trial (RCT) involving 36 stroke
units assigned to either an intervention to promote
stroke carer training or usual care. The intervention was
targeted at routine multidisciplinary stroke staff and in-
cluded multiple components: carer resources (training
manual and training record), taught sessions for staff
and staff resources (slides and recorded staff training
sessions). It was designed to be cascaded by trained staff
to those not yet trained to incorporate the intervention
into usual care. However, a process evaluation pub-
lished in this journal demons trated poor implementa-
tion, with no mechanisms existing for ensuring fidelity
of the intervention in practice [15]. Results at 6 months
demonstrated no clinical or statistical differences
between groups on the primary outcomes of functional
independence of patients or caregiver burden. The au-
thors highlighted the need for the development of sys-
tems to monitor intervention use within practice and
for researchers to consider implementation strategies a
priori , ideally in partnership with the end users of the
intervention.
Rehabilitation interventions tend to be complex inter-
ventions, i.e. interventions comprising several compo-
nents acting either independently or interdependently
[16]. Successful implementation of complex interven-
tions, such as GRASP or TRACS, relies on changing the
behaviours of those responsible for their implementation
[16]. However, consideration of behaviour change of
healthcare professionals in the development and imple-
mentation of complex interventions has traditionally
been given cursory attention. Fewer still formally test
the feasibility of proposed interventions prior to evalu-
ation [17]. Developing behaviour change interventions,
which by definition are complex, is a growing field of
enquiry, but as of yet, there is no gold standard method
reported within the literature. Guidance, such as the
MRC framework for the development and evaluation of
complex interventions [16], identifies the use of theory
as a fundamental component of intervention develop-
ment, but how theories should be used to inform
methods is less clear.Connell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 2 of 9
One way to enhance the development of interven-
tions targeting health professionals ’behaviour could be
through applying the framework outlined in the Behav-
iour Change Wheel (BCW) [18]. This was first detailed
in a publication in 2011, with further information in a
book which was published following the commence-
ment of this project [19]. The BCW aims to provide a
systematic process from behavioural analysis to inter-
vention design. It was developed following a systematic
review and a synthesis of 19 existing frameworks of
behaviour change. It has three layers; at its core, the
COM-B (capability, opportun ity, motivation and be-
haviour) model was surrounded by nine intervention
functions and seven policy categories. The authors
tested the reliability of the framework against two
existing policies for tobac co and obesity management.
However, the process of using the BCW to develop
new interventions and the extent to which applying
the BCW will lead to more successful interventions
has yet to be evaluated.
Using the BCW as a guide, we have developed a
behaviour change intervention that aims to increase
intensity of upper limb exer cise in stroke rehabilita-
tion. Many challenges exist both in devising the con-
tent of behaviour change interventions and in
systematically reporting interventions in a level of
detail sufficient to allow replication in other studies or
for use in practice [20]. The aim of this paper is to
describe the processes that took place in developing a
behaviour change intervention and to describe the
resulting intervention. This will contribute to the
growing evidence base on the development of complex
interventions and allow for improved interpretation of
findings in future studies t esting the effectiveness of
the intervention.
Methods
We did not define the methods for developing the be-
haviour change intervention ap r i o r i . It was an iterative
process that was guided, though not rigidly, by the
BCW [18]. The stages of development that emerged
during the process are illustrated in Figure 1. As there
was no change in treatments provided to patients from
accepted standards, ethical approval from the National
Research Ethics Service (NRES) was not required for
this phase of the study. Approval was obtained from
the local Research and Development (R&D) office for
the site.
Stage 1: Establish intervention development group
Stage one entailed establishing an intervention devel-
opment group that engaged key stakeholders and end
users of the intervention, as well as researchers. This
sustained collaborative approach to interventiondevelopment is novel as rehabilitation interventions
have traditionally been developed by academic re-
search teams for the purposes of testing in efficacy tri-
als with limited on-going practitioner input. However,
as there is now a robust evidence base underpinning
the importance of intensity in stroke rehabilitation,
the focus of research has shifted from efficacy studies
to translational research to implement this evidence in
practice. The rationale for the collaborative partner-
ship was to maximise the “potential fit ”of the devel-
oped intervention, and intervention materials, with
the context in which the intervention would be imple-
mented [21].
Stage 2: Structured discussions to understand the
problem, prioritise target behaviours and analyse target
behaviours
In stage two, the intervention development group
engaged in structured discu ssions to understand the
problem (i.e. how upper limb exercise could be
increased in the stroke rehabilitation unit) and identifyFigure 1 Stages of development.Connell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 3 of 9
behaviours that could be amenable to change within
the limits of the project using the BCW [18] as a guide
and to prompt discussion. Information from formative
research on current UK thera py practice for prescribing
upper limb exercises [22], and how the GRASP has
been previously implemented [13], was used as a basis
for brainstorming possible target behaviours. A list of
all potential target behaviours was generated by the
group, which the group then prioritised according to
how amenable to change they perceived them to be
using guidance from the BCW.
Each target behaviour was analysed to determine how
best behaviour change could be achieved using the
COM-B model, the hub of the BCW [19]. COM-B is a
simple model to understand behaviour based on cap-
ability (psychological or phys ical ability to enact the
behaviour), opportunity (the physical and social envir-
onment that enables the behaviour) and motivation
(reflective and automatic mechanisms that activate or
inhibit behaviour). A definition of the COM-B model
a n dp r e v i o u se x a m p l e sw e r eg i v e nt ot h eg r o u pt of a -
cilitate discussions to iden tify what needed to change in
order for therapists to be able to perform these target
behaviours.
Stage 3: Collaborative design of theoretically
underpinned intervention components
The methods in stage three were less aligned with the
Behaviour Change Wheel. It entailed a collaborative
design exercise to identify intervention components and
was informed by the Behaviour Change Technique Tax-
onomy (v1) (BCTTv1) [23]. The aim of the BCTTv1 is
to provide a reliable and systematic method of describ-
ing and categorising behaviour change techniques
(BCTs) used in interventions. Employing consistent ter-
minology to describe these techniques allows developers
to identify the active ingredients of interventions, test
these active ingredients and comprehensively describe
interventions to facilitate replication in future research
[24]. During the design exercise, the BCTTv1 [23] was
used by the intervention development group to facilitate
discussion around potential behaviour change tech-
niques, and delivery methods, to ensure all options were
considered. A description of what intervention compo-
nents could look like was then drafted. The research
team produced versions of the intervention components
which were presented back to the therapists for
additional feedback and refining.
Stage 4: Piloting and refining of intervention components
Stage four represents the on-going reflexive cycle dur-
ing which the developed intervention components were
p i l o t e da n dr e f i n e db a s e do nt h ee x p e r i e n c e so ft h ee n dusers. Between development meetings, the therapy
team had the opportunity to test each of the interven-
tion components designed in the real-life clinical set-
ting for a few weeks. At each development meeting,
feedback was obtained and discussed, and the reflexive
cycle repeated.
Results
Stage 1: Establish intervention development group
The intervention development group comprised a col-
laborative partnership between two members of the
research team (LC and NM) and a local therapy team
(physiotherapists, occupational therapists, rehabilita-
tion assistants) representative of the end users of the
intervention. The site where intervention development
took place was originally identified through existing
contacts between LC and local therapists working in
stroke rehabilitation. The site was a stroke rehabilita-
tion unit in a conurbation in the north west of England,
located separately to the acute stroke unit. LC and NM
lead the intervention development group meetings.
Both are female chartered physiotherapists working full
time in the field of stroke rehabilitation research and
implementation science. All members of the therapy
team were invited to attend meetings and attendance
ranged from 4 to 8 staff members at each meeting. A
senior physiotherapist (NHS Band 6) with 4-year rota-
tional experience of working in stroke rehabilitation
took the lead on keeping the rehabilitation team in-
formed about the development process and progress
and ensuring that the intervention documentation was
being completed. Meetings took place at the develop-
ment site at times deemed suitable by the therapy
team. In total, eight meetings were held over a period
of 7 months.
Stage 2: Structured discussions to understand the
problem, prioritise target behaviours and analyse target
behaviours
The problem to be addressed was the intensity of upper
limb task-oriented training completed by stroke survi-
vors in the stroke rehabilitation unit. Structured discus-
sions during intervention development group meetings
highlighted a range of different interdependent behav-
iours that need to be performed to bring about this
increased intensity of exercise. These are illustrated in
Figure 2.
Based on the BCW method for prioritising target
behaviours, it was decided by the intervention develop-
ment group that therapist level behaviours would be
the focus of the intervention in this study for the fol-
lowing reasons: (i) they were viewed as the first steps in
the causal chain and hence have spillover effect, (ii)
they were considered by the group to be amenable toConnell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 4 of 9
change and (iii) following pilo ting demonstrated strong
potential to positively increase upper limb exercise in
the stroke rehabilitation unit.
The group prioritised four target behaviours at the
therapist level:
1. Identifying suitable patients for exercises.
2. Provision of exercises and equipment.
3. Communicating exercises to family/visitors.
4. Monitoring and reviewing exercises.
Each target behaviour was analysed to determine what
needed to change and how best behaviour change could
be achieved using the COM-B model, the hub of the
BCW. The views of the therapists discussed here were
also corroborated with formative research findings and
other relevant literature. The results of the behavioural
analysis for the target behaviours using the COM-B
model are shown in Figure 3.
Capability
/C15All therapists had the physical capability to perform
the four target behaviours. Therapists discussed thatfrom assessments, it was not always clear who
should be prescribed upper limb exercises, in
particular who should be prescribed exercises to be
practised outside of therapy time. Therapists also
discussed that entry level therapists new to stroke
rehabilitation can often find it difficult to identify
exercises suitable to the stroke survivor ’s level of
ability. All therapists not only discussed the
importance of family and carer involvement in
rehabilitation but also highlighted the challenge of
effectively engaging families/visitors in the
rehabilitation process.
Opportunity
/C15The most frequently discussed issue that needed to
be addressed in order for therapists to successfully
perform the four target behaviours was the limited
time available to them in their working day.
Therapists also discussed issues around social
opportunity such as the limited amount of emphasis
placed on addressing upper limb impairment in
inpatient stroke rehabilitation settings compared to
that placed on recovery of the lower limb, transfers
Figure 2 The interdependent network of behaviours.Connell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 5 of 9
and mobilising. In inpatient stroke rehabilitation,
there is also limited physical opportunity for
therapists to monitor, review and progress
prescribed exercises prior to discharge as a result of
continually reducing length of stay and early
discharge of stroke survivors.
Motivation
/C15Limited physical and social opportunity to perform
the target behaviours was identified as having an
effect on therapist ’s motivation. All therapists
discussed the importance of increasing intensity of
upper limb exercises in inpatient stroke
rehabilitation settings, and their desire to more
actively engage in this, but the lack of external
drivers hampered this motivation. For example,
currently, in the national stroke rehabilitation
guidelines, there are targets for the time taken until
assessment and amount of therapy received but no
quantifiable targets relevant to upper limb
rehabilitation [ 7].Stage 3: Collaborative design of theoretically
underpinned intervention components
As illustrated in the behavioural analysis (Figure 3),
physical opportunity and social opportunity emerged as
the domains most in need of change to facilitate thera-
pists in performing the target behaviours. To manage
the scale, and the scope of the intervention, the inter-
vention development group focused on developing
intervention components, underpinned by behaviour
change techniques from the Behaviour Change Tech-
nique Taxonomy (v1) that could address these
domains.
The developed intervention is PRACTISE (Promoting
Recovery of the Arm: Clinical Tools for Intensive Stroke
Exercise). PRACTISE consists of team meetings and the
PRACTISE Toolkit.
1. Team meetings.
Although the face-to-face meetings between the clin-
ical team and research teams at this stage in the study
were initially required for the development process, theyCOM-B modelIdentifying 
suitable patients 
for exercisesProvision of 
exercises & 
equipmentCommunicating 
exercises to family/ 
visitorsMonitoring and 
reviewing 
exercises
Physical 
Capability/checkbld /checkbld /checkbld /checkbld
Psychological 
Capability/xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld
Physical 
Opportunity/xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld
Social 
Opportunity/xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld
Reflective 
Motivation/xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld
Automatic 
Motivation/xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld /xmarkbld
/checkbld Does not need to change to be ab le to perform target behaviour
/xmarkbld Needs to change somewhat to be able to perform target behaviour
/xmarkbld Needs to change a lot to be ab le to perform target behaviour
Figure 3 Behavioural analysis for the four target behaviours using the COM-B modelConnell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 6 of 9
were ultimately identified as an important component of
the intervention itself as they ensured commitment to
implementation and provided opportunity for self-
monitoring of behaviour (i.e. measuring fidelity to the
developed intervention), problem solving and action
planning.
2. PRACTISE Toolkit.
Please see Additional file 1: The PRACTISE Toolkit
for draft versions of each of the following components.
The developed toolkit included:
2a.A screening tool and upper limb exercise plan: to
enable therapists to efficiently identify patients that
should be receiving upper limb exercises and
document prescribed upper limb exercises in the
medical notes.
2b.A PRACTISE exercise pack: to enable therapists to
efficiently communicate (verbally and in written
format) the rationale for the exercise programme,
the individual exercises (based on GRASP exercises,
with written and pictorial instructions) to be
completed by the patient, and to enable the
therapist and the patient to monitor repetitions of
exercises using an exercise diary.
2c.An audit tool: to enable therapists to self-monitor
performance around provision of upper limb
exercises to suitable patients in the stroke
rehabilitation unit.
Data from the screening tool and the upper limb ex-
ercise plan were used as a source of information for the
audit tool to monitor the numbers of appropriate pa-
tients in the unit for which the target behaviours were
being performed (see Additional file 1: The PRACTISE
Toolkit). It should be noted that the components of the
toolkit are intended to have some flexibility in terms of
form (e.g. to fit with local sy stems/policies), but the
intervention aim and BCTs are standardised. The inter-
vention components, their underpinning behaviour
change techniques and what they aimed to change are
summarised in Table 1.Stage 4: Piloting and refining of intervention components
As the intervention components were drafted, they were
pilot tested by the therapy team. Pilot testing allowed
the group to establish whether or not the intervention
impacted on the prioritised behaviours in the desired
way and also to establish in what way, if any, the inter-
vention components could be refined and improved. Fol-
lowing piloting, all components stayed, but the format
was often modified or refined. An example of this was
the introduction of the “Front sheet ”(see Additional file
1: The PRACTISE Toolkit). Originally, the “Exercise
Plan ”was provided to patients as part of their PRAC-
TISE Pack. However, feedback from therapists piloting
the form suggested that it contained too much informa-
tion and was too complicated for this purpose. The sim-
pler “Front sheet ”was developed to include the patient ’s
goal, the exercises they had been prescribed, the names
of individuals willing to assist with the exercises and the
date for review.
Discussion
This paper describes our experience of developing a
complex behaviour change intervention that aims to in-
crease upper limb repetitive task-oriented training in
stroke rehabilitation units. The developed intervention
is PRACTISE. PRACTISE consists of team meetings
and the PRACTISE Toolkit (a screening tool and upper
limb exercise plan, PRACTISE exercise pack and an
audit tool).
Developing and describing PRACTISE was resource-
intensive. The efforts required for intervention develop-
ment have been noted previously [14,25], yet securing
funding and publishing this type of work is still prob-
lematic. In this study, we used the Behaviour Change
Wheel, although not rigidly, to guide the development
process [19]. In trying to document the iterative process
and maintain clarity, it is presented as more linear than
it actually was. Although the BCW did provide a frame-
work, there are still many ways in which it could be
applied. In previous research studies applying the BCW
to design an intervention, researchers have used inter-
views and questionnaires with the target group to iden-
tify factors that need to change in order for behaviour to
Table 1 Intervention components, underpinning behaviour change techniques and what they aimed to change
What needed to change Behaviour change techniques Intervention components
(see Additional file 1)
Physical
opportunityDue to time constraints, more efficient ways of performing
the target behaviours were needed4.1 Instruction on how to perform the
behaviour 3.2 Social support (practical)2a. Screening tool and
exercise plan 2b. PRACTISE
pack
Social
opportunityGetting upper limb rehabilitation higher up on the agenda
was needed through managerial support and team
engagement1.2 Problem solving 1.4 Action planning 1.9
Commitment 2.3 Self-monitoring of
behaviour1. Team meetings 2c. Audit
toolConnell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 7 of 9
occur [26-28]. We built on formative research findings
[13] and had structured discussions with the interven-
tion development group. As the development process
was over several months, therapists were able to reflect
on the discussions over time and consider the behav-
ioural analysis during their clinical practice and could
still input these into the development. This method has
the limitations of being arguably less methodologically
robust (e.g. not transcribed/less reproducible) but meant
that it was insightful and comprehensive. The fact that it
built on formative research which involved therapists
both in the UK and Canada provides some credence that
the findings will be generalizable to other stroke re-
habilitation units.
The collaborative design of the intervention compo-
nents (stage 3) was less aligned with the Behaviour
Change Wheel. Based on the behavioural analysis, any of
the BCW intervention functions could be selected and
hence any of the policy categories. In addition, the policy
categories are not well defined and, as the name sug-
gests, aimed more at a policy level (e.g. legislation, fiscal
measures). Our intervention would all fit under the cat-
egory “service provision, ”which incorporates a vast array
of potential intervention components. It was therefore
felt the BCW was less directive and helpful at this stage.
However, the Behaviour Change Technique Taxonomy
(v1) was particularly useful during the intervention de-
velopment process as it provided common terminology
to describe the purpose of the intervention components.
This aligns with previous evidence suggesting that when
developing and testing complex interventions, there is a
need to be clear about the function of the intervention
components but to allow some flexibility with the form
to allow adaptation at the local context [29]. Using spe-
cified behaviour change techniques from a published
taxonomy, together with the embedded toolkit perform-
ance measures, will provide components through which
fidelity to the intervention can be measured in future
research and clinical use. It is anticipated that this will
assist with the difficult process of unpicking the active
mechanisms within the intervention during an evalu-
ation study, with the importance of undertaking this
careful development work recognised [30].
We also had the opportunity to test and refine devel-
oped intervention components with the end users. This
stage is not included in the BCW but emerged as key to
our development process. Involving users has been dem-
onstrated to be the best predictor for ensuring research
is translated into practice [31], and so, in this study, we
endeavoured to maximise the acceptability of the inter-
vention through collaborative working with users, i.e.
stroke therapy teams. They reported that the developed
toolkit components were inexpensive, acceptable to the
therapy team and fitted well with current methods ofdocumentation, and were practical for therapists and pa-
tients/families.
Despite the fact that we did not define the develop-
ment process in advance, numerous similarities can be
seen between our methods and research in both the
implementation science literature and other areas such
as quality improvement, e.g. Plan-Do-Study Act (PDSA)
cycles. It is often the same premise (i.e. understand, test,
evaluate, refine), understood and explored using differ-
ent theories or frameworks. Describing our development
process should be of interest to others who are trying to
develop interventions to change behaviour of health
professionals.
Future work
Following the development and testing of PRACTISE,
the intervention now needs to be tested in other stroke
rehabilitation units prior to a definitive effectiveness
trial, both in terms of change in health professional be-
haviour and patient outcomes. A feasibility case study of
the PRACTISE toolkit in two stroke rehabilitation units
is currently on-going.
Conclusion
This paper provides an example as to how the Behaviour
Change Wheel may be applied in the collaborative de-
velopment of a behaviour change intervention for health
professionals. The process involved was resource-
intensive, and it was difficult to capture the iterative
process. The use of the Behaviour Change Wheel and
behaviour change techniques from a published tax-
onomy provide an example of how these frameworks
may be applied and will assist replication in future
research and clinical use.
Additional file
Additional file 1: Practise Toolkit. Draft version of the PRACTISE
Toolkit.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interest.
Authors ’contributions
The original idea for this research study was conceived by LC, supported by
CW and JE. LC and NM led the intervention development process. All
authors contributed to writing up the study findings and critically reviewed
the final version for publication. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Louise Connell is funded by a National Institute for Health Research Career
Development Fellowship. This article presents independent research funded
by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR). The views expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the
Department of Health. We would like to acknowledge the contribution of all
therapists and stroke rehabilitation team members that participated in the
development of PRACTISE.Connell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 8 of 9
Author details
1Clinical Practice Research Unit, School of Health, University of Central
Lancashire, Preston PR1 2HE, England.2Department of Physical Therapy,
University of British Columbia, 212-2177 Wesbrook Mall, V6T 1Z3 Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.
Received: 7 October 2014 Accepted: 20 February 2015
References
1. Nudo RJ. Recovery after brain injury: mechanisms and principles. Front Hum
Neurosci. 2013;7:887.
2. Veerbeek JM, van Wegen E, van Peppen R, van der Wees PJ, Hendriks E,
Rietberg M, et al. What is the evidence for physical therapy poststroke? A
systematic review and meta-analysis. PloS One. 2014;9:e87987.
3. Kwah LK, Harvey LA, Diong J, Herbert RD. Models containing age and NIHSS
predict recovery of ambulation and upper limb function six months after
stroke: an observational study. J Physiother. 2013;59:189 –97.
4. Nichols-Larsen DS, Clark PC, Zeringue A, Greenspan A, Blanton S. Factors
influencing stroke survivors ’quality of life during subacute recovery. Stroke.
2005;36:1480 –4.
5. Barker RN, Brauer SG. Upper limb recovery after stroke: the stroke survivors ’
perspective. Disabil Rehabil. 2005;27:1213 –23.
6. Lohse KR, Lang CE, Boyd LA. Is more better? Using metadata to explore
dose –response relationships in stroke rehabilitation. Stroke. 2014;45:2053 –8.
7. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Stroke Rehabilitation
[CG162]. London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; 2013.
8. Nudo RJ, Wise BM, SiFuentes F, Milliken GW. Neural substrates for the
effects of rehabilitative training on motor recovery after ischemic infarct.
Science. 1996;272:1791 –4.
9. Kaur G, English C, Hillier S. How physically active are people with stroke in
physiotherapy sessions aimed at improving motor function? A systematic
review. Stroke Res Treat. 2012;2012:820673.
10. Lang C, MacDonald J, Reisman D, Boyd L, Kimberley T, Schindler-Ivens S,
et al. Observation of amounts of movement practice provided during stroke
rehabilitation. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2009;90:1692 –8.
11. Harris JE, Eng JJ, Miller WC, Dawson AS. A Self-Administered Graded
Repetitive Arm Supplementary Program (GRASP) improves arm function
during inpatient stroke rehabilitation a multi-site randomized controlled
trial. Stroke. 2009;40:2123 –8.
12. Connell LA, McMahon NE, Watkins CL, Eng JJ. Therapists ’use of the Graded
Repetitive Arm Supplementary Program (GRASP) intervention: a practice
implementation survey study. Phys Ther. 2014;94:632 –43.
13. Connell L, McMahon N, Harris J, Watkins C, Eng J. A formative evaluation of
the implementation of an upper limb stroke rehabilitation intervention in
clinical practice: a qualitative interview study. Implement Sci 2014, 9.
14. Forster A, Young J, Nixon J, Kalra L, Smithard D, Patel A, et al. A cluster
randomized controlled trial of a structured training programme for
caregivers of inpatients after stroke (TRACS). Int J Stroke. 2012;7:94 –9.
15. Forster A, Dickerson J, Melbourn A, Steadman J, Wittink M, Young J et al.
The development and implementation of the structured training
programme for caregivers of inpatients after stroke (TRACS) intervention:
The London Stroke Carers Training Course. Clin Rehabil 2014;
0269215514543334.
16. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M.
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical
Research Council guidance. BMJ. 2008;337:a1655 –5.
17. Corry M, Clarke M, While AE, Lalor J. Developing complex interventions for
nursing: a critical review of key guidelines. J Clin Nurs. 2013;22:2366 –86.
18. Michie S, van Stralen MM, West R. The behaviour change wheel: a new
method for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions.
Implement Sci. 2011;6:42.
19. Michie S, Atkins L, West R: The Behaviour Change Wheel: A Guide To
Designing Interventions. 2014. http://www.behaviourchangewheel.com/.
Accessed 20 Jan 2015.
20. Douet L, Milne R, Anstee S, Habens F, Young A, Wright D. The completeness
of intervention descriptions in published National Institute of Health
Research HTA-funded trials: a cross-sectional study. BMJ Open.
2014;4:e003713.
21. Curran GM, Mukherjee S, Allee E, Owen RR. A process for developing an
implementation intervention: QUERI Series. Implement Sci. 2008;3:17.22. Connell LA, McMahon NE, Eng JJ, Watkins CL. Prescribing upper limb
exercises after stroke: a survey of current UK therapy practice. J Rehabil
Med. 2014;46:212 –8.
23. Michie S, Richardson M, Johnston M, Abraham C, Francis J, Hardeman W,
et al. The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically
clustered techniques: building an international consensus for the reporting
of behavior change interventions. Ann Behav Med. 2013;46:81 –95.
24. Abraham C, Michie S. A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychol. 2008;27:379 –87.
25. Ramsay P, Salisbury L, Merriweather J, Huby G, Rattray J, Hull A, et al. A
rehabilitation intervention to promote physical recovery following intensive
care: a detailed description of construct development, rationale and
content together with proposed taxonomy to capture processes in a
randomised controlled trial. Trials. 2014;15:38.
26. Bonner C, Jansen J, McKinn S, Irwig L, Doust J, Glasziou P, et al. General
practitioners ’use of different cardiovascular risk assessment strategies: a
qualitative study. Med J Aust. 2013;199:485 –9.
27. English M. Designing a theory-informed, contextually appropriate intervention
strategy to improve delivery of paediatric services in Kenyan hospitals.
Implement Sci. 2013;8:39.
28. Fuller C, Michie S, Savage J, McAteer J, Besser S, Charlett A, et al. The
Feedback Intervention Trial (FIT) —improving hand-hygiene compliance in
UK healthcare workers: a stepped wedge cluster randomised controlled trial.
PLoS One. 2012;7:e41617.
29. Hawe P, Shiell A, Riley T. Complex interventions: how “out of control ”can a
randomised controlled trial be? BMJ. 2004;328:1561 –3.
30. Sutton C. Developing and evaluating complex interventions. Matern Child
Nutr. 2014;10:163 –5.
31. Lomas J. Using ‘linkage and exchange ’to move research into policy at a
Canadian foundation. Health Aff (Millwood). 2000;19:236 –40.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitConnell et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:34 Page 9 of 9
