Running head: PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS FOR YOUNG PEOPLE 
LIVING WITH AND BEYOND CANCER  
  Abstract  
Objective: To identify the behaviour change techniques and intervention components 
associated with the promotion of physical activity (PA) for children and young people living 
with and beyond cancer.  
Design and main outcome measures: A systematic review a nd narrative synthesis was 
conducted on the evidence on PA interventions for children and young people (up to 30 years 
of age) living with and beyond cancer using a social ecological framework.  
Results: Out of 12 studies, 8 were shown to change PA. Interv ention components included: 1) 
behavioural (Instruction on how to perform the behaviour, credible source, behavioural 
demonstration and rehearsal), 2) cognitive -emotional (targeting attitude, perceived 
behavioural control, intentions, resilience and achiev ement) 3) socio -cultural (family and peer 
support for PA), 4) environmental (providing access to resources, environmental 
restructuring, safety), 5) demographic (child, adolescent, young adult or mixed) and 6) 
medical (tailored exercise depending on age an d cancer stage).  
Conclusions: Interventions designed to increase physical activity participation and adherence 
during and beyond cancer treatment for young people should integrate psychosocial 
(behavioural, cognitive -emotional, social), environmental and medical intervention 
components. Our conceptual model can be used to inform the development of interventions 
and guides future research objectives and priorities.  
Keywords: cancer, interventions, physical activity, children, young people.  
 
 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
2 
 Physical activi ty (PA) during  and beyond cancer treatment has been shown in 
systematic reviews and meta -analyses to have an established range of benefits in terms of 
biopsychosocial outcomes including  physical functioning, rol e function, social functioning,  
overall qual ity of life ( Mishra, Scherer, Snyder, Geigle, Gotay, 2014 ) and cancer -related 
fatigue (Cramp & Byron‐Danie 1, 2011 ).  There is growing evidence that young people with 
cancer  who are physically active during treatment benefit from positive psychological effects 
(Cox, Montgomery, Oeffinger, Leisenring, Zeltzer , et al., 2009; Rosipal, Mingle, Smith &  
Morris , 2013 ). A Cochrane systematic review into children and teenagers under 1 8 years of 
age concluded that exercise during cancer  treatment can improve fitness, flexibility and body 
composition  (Braam, van der Torre, Takken, Veening,  Dulmen‐den Broeder, et al, 2016).  
Providing effective, tailored psychosocial  support for children and young people during  and 
beyond cancer treatment to increase and sustain PA is a priority to improve physical, 
psychological, and social health outcomes across the lifespan ( Baumann, Bloch & Beulertz , 
2013; Sabiston & Brunet, 2012 ). However, young people  report low levels of PA at the time 
of the  cancer diagnosis  and for months, years, or decades beyond treatment ( Winter, Müller, 
Brandes, Brinkmann, Hoffmann et al., 2009 ), which  highlights the importance of initiating 
effective psychosocial interven tions for children and young people living with and beyond 
cancer . Furthermore, these effects may transfer into adulthood as between 20% and 52% of 
adult survivors of childhoo d cancer are inactive  (Butterfield, Park, Puleo, Mertens, Gritz , Li 
et al., 2004; Demark‐Wahnefried, Werner, Clipp, Guill , Bonner , Jones  & Rosoff , 2005; Pinto 
& Trunzo, 2005 ). A review confirmed that childhood or adolescent can cer survivors  were 
less likely to be  active in adulthood  compared with age matched non -cancer controls ( Stolley, 
Restrepo & Sharp, 2010 ).   
             As young people’s  levels of PA are multidimensional behaviour  and influenced by a 
number of factors , such as gender , parental influences , time spent outdoors , intentions to be 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
3 
 active, perceived barriers  and ability (Hinkley, Crawford, Salmon, Okely & Hesketh, 2008; 
Sallis, Prochaska, & Taylor, 2000; Taylor &, Sallis, 1997), interventionists should consider 
targeting each to elicit behaviour change. Social ecological approaches to intervention des ign 
provide one solution in terms of a framework that accounts for the social, environmental, 
medical and environmental influences on behaviour change, in addition to psychological 
factors. The social ecological framework (based on ecological systems theor y, 
Bonfenbrenner, 1979; Kazak, 1989) has been used previously in a systematic review of the 
predictors of PA for child and adolescent survivors of cancer (Gilliam & Schwebel, 2013) , 
although not the intervention features . The review was used to devise a so cial ecological 
framework model that integrates the roles of intrapersonal factors (e.g., vulnerability), 
interpersonal factors (e.g., peer relations) and socio -cultural factors (e.g., minority status). 
Demographic and medical components interact with soci al and environmental systems to 
produce cognitions, emotions and behaviours which allow for greater accuracy in our ability 
to explain and promote the development and maintenance of PA in young cancer survivors.   
We propose to extend th is work  by mapping the intervention components and 
behaviour change techniques from interventions designed to increase physical activity in 
young people and children living with and beyond cancer. Little is known about the 
behaviour change techniques that might promote long term behaviour change; interventions 
utilising BCTs are frequently complex, consisting of numerous interacting components that 
are often poorly described ( Michie & Johnston, 2012 ). This makes synthesising the evidence 
for effectiveness to inform future interventions challenging. In order to advance behavioural 
medicine by promoting precise and consistent reporting of complex interventions, the 
Behaviour Change Technique Taxonomy ( version 1)  was created ( Michie, Richardson, 
Johnston, Abraham, Francis, Hardeman  et al. , 2013). Based on expert consensus, this 
hierarchical classification system has been used in numerous systematic reviews to reliably 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
4 
 identify behaviour change techniques  associated with the most successful interventions 
(Dombrowski, Knittle, Avenell, Araújo -Soares, & Sniehotta, 2014 ; French, Olander, 
Chisholm & McSharry, 2 014; Samdal, Eide, Barth, Williams, & Meland, 2017). Coding the 
behaviour change techniques within in terventions may help us to identify which techniques 
are commonly utilised in interventions  designed to improve physical activity for children and 
young people living with and beyond cancer.  
Whilst previous reviews have looked at predictors of PA purely from a behaviour 
change point of view (Pugh et al., 2016) in young cancer survivors, supporting young people 
living with and beyond cancer with PA is complicated further with the influences of 
diagnosis and treatment -related factors, plus cognitive and behavioural reactions by parents, 
children and their peers to those influences. To date, there are no existing reviews using the 
social -ecological approach which examine the PA interventions appro aches applied in both 
young people and children at the time of cancer treatment and beyond . Additionally, many of 
the existing interventions are underpowered due to challenges in recruiting young cancer 
populations and focus on the outcomes of intervention s, rather than the component features 
which may affect outcomes or delivery in practice. Therefore, the  aim of this systematic 
review is to summarize the psychosocial ecological components of PA interventions for both 
children and young people living with and beyond cancer . Additionally, we sought to review 
the commonly used BCTs in interventions.  
 
Methods  
Protocol  
The protocol was pre-registered with PROSPERO reference CRD42017064591.  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
5 
 Eligibility Criteria  
We included studies describing a PA intervention for  children and young people (up 
to the age of 30 years)  who  we re  under going  or  who  ha d  completed  treatment  for  cancer  
(any  form  or  stage)  in order to capture all available interventions in this under -researched 
population .  We e xcluded studies  with participant samples  above the age of  30 years in order 
to capture the range in international definitions of child and young adult oncology 
populations . Given the emerging evidence base in this under -researched and difficult to 
recruit population, we  included studies describing randomised  controlled  trials  (with  or  
without  nested  qualitative  studies),  as well as pilot and  feasibility  RCTs, observational  
studies,  cohort  studies,  case  control  studies,  and  quasi -experimen tal  studies and 
excluded qualitative  methods studies . 
Interventions. Studies were only included  when they reported outcome measures of 
objective or self -reported physical activity using standardised subjective or objective tools 
between baseline, and post -intervention . Studies were included when they reported at  least  
one  Behaviour  Change  Technique  (BCT)  from  the BCT  taxonomy  v1 ( Michie, 
Richardson , Johnston, Abraham, Francis et al., 2013 ) but  did  not  have  to specify a 
theore tical  basis.  We sought to find studies des cribing interventions delivered in a variety of 
settings (e.g.  community centres ,  hospital,  clinic,  private  residence)  or  modes  of  
delivery  (e.g.,  face -to-face,  by  text  message,  by  phone  call).  
Information Sources  
For our full search strategy , including s earch terms  and databases, see  online 
supplementary materials.  This review included comprehensive searches on the following 
electronic databases: Scopus PsycINFO, CINAHL and Web of Science Core C ollection, the 
Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (CENTRAL), Google Scholar, PubMed and 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
6 
 SPORTDiscus (from inception up to August 2018). In addition to the electronic database 
searches, relevant conference proceedings from 1995 to September 2018  were searched by 
hand in order to identify unpublished studies. Key authors in the field were contacted via 
email to advise of any unpublished interventions. We also searched the reference lists of 
relevant articles and books; the Database of Abstracts of  Reviews of Effects (DARE); the 
Cochrane systematic review database; the National Institute of Health Research (NIHR) 
portfolio for recently completed or ongoing studies; the current controlled trials register; and 
the System for Information on Grey Litera ture (SIGLE).  A hand search of the bibliographies 
of all included studies was completed along with a search of key related journals from our 
scoping search including Psycho -oncology, Journal of Cancer Care, British Journal of Health 
Psychology, Journal of  Health Psychology and Psychology and Health . Papers  were  eligible  
for  inclusion  in  the review when they  were  available  in  English  as  full  text,  reporting  
primary  quantitative  data,  and  were either  published  in peer -reviewed  sources  between  
1995  and  2018,  or,  for  registered  trials  only,  are  unpublished  but  ha d  been completed,  
and  the  results  were  obtainable  from  the  authors.  Where results  from  the  same  trial  
were  reported  across  multiple sources (e.g . Keats,  & Culos -Reed, 2008 ; Keats,  & Culos -
Reed, 2009 ) the  information  from  these  sources  was pooled  and  treated  as  one single 
intervention for  the  purpose  of analysis.   
Search terms  
Our search str ategy utilised PICO conceptual search terms and well as population  
MeS H terms  including population (e.g.  solid tumor, blood or bone cancers  ), intervention 
(e.g. community or hospital based ), comparator (e.g., clinical trial , observational cohort 
study ), and outcome themes (e.g., exercise, physical acti vity)  (see online supplementary 
materials  for our full search strategy ).  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
7 
 Study Selection  
One reviewer (AC) screened all retrieved records identified through initial searches 
against eligibility criteria in two stages. Initial screening was based on titles , abstracts and 
keywords and the second reviewer (DS) screened a random 20% of t he total titles and 
abstracts. T he findings were discussed to reach a consensus on the studies to take forward to 
the next stage of the review. Following initial screening, ful l-text versions of all potentially 
relevant studies were retrieved and reviewed independently and screened against all inclusion 
and exclusion criteria by two reviewers  (AC and DS).  
Data Collection Process  and Data items  
Data extraction occurred in two  stages; 1. general study data was extracted using a 
data extraction form based on the TIDIER framework for intervention reporting ( Hoffmann , 
Glasziou, Boutron, Milne , Perera  et al., 2014 ), 2. extracting intervention data from each of 
the social -ecological  model domains ( see online supplementary materials ). Where  necessary, 
we attempted to contact the authors by email on key missing data elements.   
Risk of Bias in Individual studies  
Risk of bias  was assessed by two reviewers  (AC, NH)  using the Cochrane ris k of bias 
assessment tool  (Higgins, Altman, Gøtzsche, Jüni, Moher et al. , 2011 ) for RCTs and the I -
Robins tool ( Sterne, Hernán, Reeves, Savović, Berkman , et al., 2016 ) for non -randomised 
studies. Each  study  was rated  for  bias  as  either: ‘low  risk  f or  bias’,  ‘unclear  risk  for  
bias’  and  ‘high  risk  for bias’ (see online supplementary materials ).  The quality of evidence 
for primary outcomes from each of the review studies was assessed using the Grading of 
Recommendations Assessment, Developmen t and Evaluation (GRADE) ( Puhan, 
Schünemann, Murad, Li, Brignardello -Petersen et al., 2014) quality domains for ‘ blinding 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
8 
 and allocation ’, ‘follow up and withdrawals ’, ‘sparse data ’ and ‘other methodological 
concerns ’ (e.g. incomplete reporting ).  
Quality of intervention reporting was  assessed using the Template for Interven tion 
Description and Replication (TIDieR) checkl ist and guide (Hoffman et al., 2014 ). TIDieR is  
intended as a tool for study authors and systematic reviewers to describe interven tions 
accurately  and consistently, with enough detail to allow replication. Two reviewers  (AC, NH)  
coded each intervention  description against the checklist as being adequately reported, 
inadequately reported, not reported,  or not applicable to the interve ntion. A  value  of 1 was  
scored  where the item was adequately described or not applicable, and a value of 0 where  it 
was inadequately described or not reported (excluding Modifications and Tailoring items as 
‘not reported ’ does not indicate a negative value ; interventions that w ere not tailored or  
modi fied received a score of 1).   
Behaviour Change Technique Coding  
Two authors (AC, NH) independently coded BCTs for all included studies who had 
both completed an online training course in using the BCT taxonomy V1  (http://www.bct -
taxonomy.com/ ) and discrepancies were resolved through  discussion . Coding BCTs was 
completed using the BCT taxonomy V1 (Michie et al., 2013 ) based on information presented 
in the incl uded papers, as well as any published protocol papers.  
 
Results  
A total of 1,835  potential articles were initially identified from the searches following 
the removal of duplicates  (see figure 1 PRISMA flow chart in supplementary materials ). 
After screenin g the abstracts, 86  full text articles were retrieved and assessed for eligibility 
against the inclusion criteria. Twelve papers (following the exclusion of one paper as it 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
9 
 reported  interim analyses of an intervention included in another review paper) of d escribing 
12 studies  met the inclusion criteria and were included in the review  
Risk of Bias in Individual studies  
This review has been reported in line with AMSTAR  (A  Measurement  Tool  to  
Assess  Systematic  Reviews) (Shea , Grimsha w, Wells, Boers , Andersson  et al., 2007 ) 
criteria  to reduce  the  potential  for  bias  in  the  review  and allow other researchers to  
evaluate the quality of reporting in this review .  
Risk of Bias: Three  studies (Fiuza -Luces et al., 2016; Moyeur -Miller et al., 2009; 
Tanir et al., 2012 ) were assessed  using the Coc hrane Risk of Bias and  9 (Beulertz et al., 2016; 
Jarvela, et al., 2011; Keats & Culos -Reed, 2009; Muller et al., 2016; San Juan et al., 2007; 
Sharkey et al., 1993; Takken et al., 2009; Vallet et al., 2015; Yeh et al., 2011 ) were assessed 
using I -Robins  by two independent rate rs (high agreement , Cohen’s k = 0.72; p > 0.001 ), with 
discrepancies in scoring resolved through discussion (see onl ine supplementary tables ). 
Cochrane Risk of Bias assessment revealed that overall the studies were low risk of bias for 
selection, performance, detection and attrition and modera te bias for selective reporting. For 
I-Robins, overall the studies were assessed as ‘low risk ’ for bias of deviation from intended 
intervention, missing data and measurement of outcomes. There was an overall moderate risk 
of bias from selection of reported  results.  
GRADE:  Two raters  independently assessed each paper against these quality 
domains using a scoring system in which one point denoted a methodological concern against 
that particular quality domain. Interrater reliability was high (Cohen’s k = 0.83 ; p > 0.001) 
and the discre pancies in scoring were resolved through discussion . The overall quality for the 
corpus  of studies was judged as low  to moderate quality  and we did not exclude any of the 
review studies on the basis of GRADE guidelines.   
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
10 
 TIDIER : In terms of quality of inte rvention reporting, only 2 (Beulertz et al., 2016; 
Fiuza -Lucez et al. , 2016)  of the 12 studies provided sufficient information on all of the 
domains ( see online supplementary materials ). A brief description (item 1 reported in k = 12), 
rationale (item 2, k = 10), mode of delivery (item 6, k = 11), how much and when (item 8 , k = 
11) and procedure (item 4, k = 9) were the most well reported. Descriptions of w hat was 
deliv ered in terms of intervention materials (item 4, k = 4) and how well the intervention was  
delivered as planned ( item 11, k = 3) were the items with the most inadequate reporting. 
Average inter -rater reliability for the TIDieR  items was good (Cohens k = 0.73 ; p > 0.001 ). 
Synthesis of Results  
 The original objectives of our review we re to assess the efficacy of current 
interventions at improving PA for children and young peop le living with and beyond cancer 
and subsequently identify whether differences in efficacy exist depending on behaviour 
change techniques  (BCTs) used within the inter ventions.  With large heterogeneity , 
underpowered studies  and only three RCTs , it is not yet appropriate to combine all of the 
available effect sizes in an overall calculation of effectiveness . As our planned analysis was 
not possible , we decided  that a narrative synthesis  approach would be  more appropriate , 
along with recommendations for future research to ensure that  more rigorous quantitative 
synthesis  is possible in years to come when a larger number of homogenous trials have been 
conducted.   
Concept ual M odel of Intervention Components  
We present a narrative synthesis  of the intervention study features which discusses 
constructs that emerged from the  Gilliam and  Schwebel (2013 ) review as unique predictors of 
PA, along with e xamples of  causal mechanisms that might explain how the constructs predict 
PA. Our proposed intervention development model (figure 2 ) uses a social ecological 
framework to explain child and adolescent survivors’ PA from a multi -component view that 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
11 
 includes  intrapersonal, in terpersonal and environmental factors. The s olid lines reflect 
empirically -documented pathways and  broken lines reflect hypothesised interactions  that 
were found i n the Gilliam and Schwebel (2013 ) review.  Our review extends the findings of 
this review by a dditionally coding the behaviour change techniques and widening the 
evidence base to account for both young adults and children, both during and beyond cancer 
treatment.  
Insert figure 2 about here  
 
Intervention features : narrative synthesis  
Eight studies  reported an overall increase or maintenance  in PA following 
participation in the interventions and nine showed sustained improvements in PA at follow up 
(range 1 -12 months).  Our narrative synthesis will explore the intervention features  across the 
domains of the socio -ecological framework: demographic  aspects, medical cancer -related 
factors, behaviour change techniques, cognitive -emotional, environmental, social and cultural 
intervention features.  
Demographic A spects of Interventions   
Participants ranged from 4 -19 years  (k = 10 studies with study samples aged 18 years and 
under , k = 1 adolescent young adults and k = 1 both). Given the paucity of intervention work 
in the area most of the studies were feasibility, exploratory studies with  sample sizes ranging 
from 4 ( 28) to 150 ( 29) participants (see online supplementary materials ). Interventions were 
based in France (k = 1), Turkey, (k = 1), Spain (k = 2) Fi nland (k = 1), Canada (k = 1), USA  
(k = 2), Netherlands  (k = 1), Taiwan (k = 1) and Germany (k = 1).  Time since diagnosis 
ranged in the studies between six months and a year for studies delivering interventions as 
part of cancer treatment, and between one year and 10 years for interventions for children and 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
12 
 young people living  beyon d cancer. Where  reported, the study means of survivorship length 
ranged between 17 months  and 10 years.  Whilst demographics are  not modifiable in a 
behaviour change sense, it is important to note that modifications that are required to physical 
activity in terventions according to the demographic profile of participants.  Several studies 
tailored the intervention according to the age of the participants.  
 
Medical  Factors  
A total of 12 studies were included in the review, eight of which  evaluated 
interventions to increase physical activity as part of cancer treatment (Fiuza -Luces  et al., 
2016;  Moyeur -Miller,  et al., 2009; Muller , et al., 20 16; San Juan, et al., 2007; Takken  et al., 
2009 ; Vallet et al., 2015; Yeh et al., 2011 ) and four were interventions following cancer 
treatment  (Jarvela , Sharkey  et al., 1993 ; Keats & Culos -Reed, 2009 , Tanir  et al., 2 012)  
Study populations mainly included individuals who were undergoing or had 
completed treatment for  Acute Lymphoblastic Leukaemia  (ALL ), lymphoma or sarcoma. 
Treatment types included chemo, radio,  adjuvant or surgical therapies. Where s tage of 
treatment wa s reported, interventions included participants from all stages of cancer.  
However, in one study (Keats & Culos -Reed, 2009) a pa rticipant underwent treatment 
during the 16 weeks of the intervention before moving to maintenance therapy, highlighting 
the need for intervention design to be sufficiently flexible to meet the needs of both those 
living with and beyond cancer, particularl y given the rates of recurrence in the younger 
cancer populations . 
Behaviour Change  Techniques  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
13 
 The number of BCTs utilised in interventions ranged from three  (Sharkey, Carey, 
Heise , Barber , et al., 1993)  to 12 ( Keats & Culos -Reed, 2009) with a mean  average of 6.4 
BCTs per study. The number of BCTs was positively associated with study quality and bias 
scores (Cochrane, I -Robins). The most prevalent BCTs were instruction on how to perform 
the behaviour  (k = 12),  followed by demonstration of the behavi our (k = 9 ), behavioural 
practice/rehearsal  (k = 9), and credible source (k = 9); almost all of the interventions 
included structured exercise classes run or recommended by an exercise professional. Among 
the BCTs utilised in the 12 studies, the least comm on were feedback on behaviour  (k = 1), 
social support  (unspecified; k = 1), information about emotional consequences  (k = 1), habit 
formation  (k = 1), and verbal persuasion about capability ( k = 1).  
For interventions delivered alongside cancer treatment, the most common BCTs in 
home -based interventions were instruction on how to perform the behaviour  and self-
monitoring of behaviour  (Järvelä  et al., 2012; Yeh et al., 2011).  In a home -based strength 
intervention , the instruction on how to perform the behaviour BCT  consisted of an exercise 
intervention  to be conducted three times a week for 16 weeks, alongside the provision of  
informati on on safety, as well as encouragement  to perform exercise s of their own choice 
(Järvelä  et al., 2012 ). In other home -based intervention s, instruction was provided by text and 
photos and delivered through instructional videos (Yeh et al., 2011). Vallet et al. (2012) 
provided instruction on act ivities outside of the hospital with the assistance of professionals 
trained in adapted PA for young adapted skiing, snowshoeing and dog sledding. The variety 
in activities was chosen to create a fun environment away from the hospital setting, which 
includ ed a diverse range of activities such as dance, cruising sail boarding, trekking and snow 
activities.  
In hospital -based settings , information was given to families on benefits of following 
a health y lifestyle comprising of  sports, play and walking (>60 min  per day) , which was 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
14 
 delivered through a perceived credible source such as a health care professional involved in 
the medical care ( Beulertz  et al., 2016; Fiuza -Luces  et al., 2017; Müller  et al., 2016; San Juan 
et al., 2007; Sharkey et al., 1993). Self-monitoring was used in several studies through 
activity monitors such as an accelerometer  (Muller et al., 2016; San Juan et al., 2007) or a 
self-report activity log (Yeh et al., 2011). The BCT Credible Source  was utilised in 9 studies; 
the exercise professionals delivering the interventions or advising participants included 
fitness instructors, exercise psychologists, physiotherapists, and sport therapists.  
Cognitive -Emotional Intervention Features  
Only one i ntervention was based on a social cognitive psychological theory; Keats & 
Culos -Reed’s (2009) intervention was informed by the  Theory of Planned Behaviour (Ajzen, 
1991) and based on findings from the authors’ earlier examination of theory in paediatric 
cancer survivors ( Keats , Culos‐Reed, Courneya & McBride, 2007 ). The theory was 
embedded within psycho education s essions targeting  the core cognition variables of attitude, 
perceived behavioural control, subjective norms and intentions .  Delivery methods to 
influence behaviour change included information provision, teaching and rehearsal of skills, 
modelling, planning and social support. The intervention provided information emphasising 
the short -term (e.g. anticipated increases in affective attitude towards ph ysical activity i.e. 
increasing enjoyment and valuing PA) and long -term benefits of regular physical activity 
(e.g. changes in instrumental attitude towards physical activity). Järvelä, Kemppainen, 
Niinikoski, Hannukainen and Lähteenmäki  et al. (2012) prov ided motivational phone support 
on barriers to performing physical activity, health concerns and identifying enablers for 
increasing their PA, although this was not theory based. The intervention also focused on 
providing guidance and advice on how to stru cture more PA into the day through action 
planning and problem solving.  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
15 
 Cognitive -Emotional Outcome s. Studies often reported cognitive -emotional outcome 
measures ( k = 9), such as intention to perform the behaviour, self -efficacy, fatigue and 
quality of life. Kulos -Reed (2009) reported that baseline measures of behavioural intention  (r 
= 0.46), controllability ( r = 0.75) and self -efficacy ( r = 0.69) moderately or strongly predicted 
PA behaviour change at the three month follow up . In addition, 14 measures  of affective (e.g. 
enjoyable -unenjoyable, harmful -beneficial, boring -interesting) and instrumental (e.g. useful -
useless, harmful -beneficial) attitude, subjective norms (important others’ views on PA) were 
taken; perceived behavioural control captured the participant’s confidence to carry out the 
exercise (self -efficacy), as well as their belief that they have control over the behaviour 
(controllability). Although Yeh, Wai, Lin and Chiang (2011 ) did not report a theory -based 
intervention, the transtheoretic al model was used to assess motivational readiness to change 
(Prochaska & Velicier, 2007); at one month after the intervention 25% of the sample ( n = 3) 
were at the ‘action stage’, and 17% ( n = 2) were at the maintenance stage having sustained 
their PA for  >6 months.  By the six -month follow up, four (34% of the sample) participants 
were in the contemplation stage and were not participating in PA at the follow up period. 
Seven were in the ‘preparation’ stage (58%) and reporting irregular, infrequent levels of PA 
with one participant reporting regular levels of PA. In terms of barriers and facilitators to 
participation in the interventions, participants in T  Takken, van der Torre, Zwerink, 
Hulzebos, Bierings et al. (2009) study cited barriers as boredom and a  lack of variation in the 
exercises which reduced their motivation to finish the intervention  or being unable to access 
the necessary equipment at a local physiotherapy centre (e.g. cycle ergometer, bench) was 
given as a reason for dropping out of the inte rvention. To overcome this, more variation in 
the form of games were added to the intervention  
Fatigue.  Three studies reported a significant reduction in fatigue at follow up ( Takken 
et al., 2009; Yeh et al., 2011;  Vallet, André, Gentet, Vers chuur, Michel , Sotteau  et al., 2015) 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
16 
 with one study also reporting  significant increases in global self -esteem, perceived sport 
competence and perceived physical strength  (Fiuza -Luces, Padilla, Valentín , Santana -Sosa E, 
Santos -Lozano  et al., 2017).  
Quality of Li fe (QoL) . Müller, Krauth,, Gerß &  Rosenbaum , (2016 ) reported 
immediate changes in health -related QoL which were sustainable for one year. T wo studies 
reported no significant differences in QoL, although a lack of statistical power may explain 
such findings  (Fiuza -Luces et al., 2017; Tanir & Kuguoglu , 2013 ). 
In terms of other important psychological outcomes, increasing negative affect for 
physical well -being was found to be significant at 12 months in one study (Muller et al., 
2016) . Additionally, no signif icant effects were found for resilience, achievement, 
satisfaction, comfort and risk avoidance (San Juan, Fleck, Chamorro -Viña, Maté -Muñoz , 
Mora  et al., 2007),  nor were there  significant effects for cognitive problems between groups. 
Treatment anxiety was significantly higher in boys, although there were no sex difference at 
follow.  Beulertz, Prokop, Rustler, Bloch, Felsch et al. (2016)  found significant differences at 
baselin e in physical and emotional well -being between the intervention and control groups 
and these effects were observable at the follow up. Vallet et al. (2015) found significant 
differences in global self -esteem, perceived sport competence and perceived physic al strength 
and additionally measured physical self -worth, perceived physical condition, and own 
perceived physical attractiveness. Tanir and Kuguoglu  (2013) found that control group 
participants were more likely to score higher on general worry and worry about the diagnosis 
and methods of treatment compared with the intervention group.  
Environmental Intervention Features  
 The environmental setting for the exercise interventions included hospital -based 
gyms  (k = 5), home based ( k = 4), a university ( k = 1), physiotherapists ( k = 1), and a 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
17 
 combination of hospital, home, and a trip ( k = 1). Other environmental intervention 
components included providing resources and space for exercise to be conducted safely.  
Social and Cultural Intervention Features  
Despite social support being known as a strong determinant  of promoting PA, most of 
the interventions were delivered at the individual level, although one intervention (Vallet et 
al., 2015 ) encouraged peer support with other young peo ple living beyond cancer treatment 
on the intervention  through a 15 day trekking and sledding excursion to Canada as a target for 
the training intervention . One parent from each of the child participants  from the Tanir  et al.  
(2013 ) study was recruited to the intervention as a participant in recognition that they could 
serve as a ‘motivating force’  and with the intent of fostering long term behaviour change . 
Parents were advised that their child would have initial difficulties  performing the ac tivities 
but that th ey would see benefit with regular performance; they were also provided with the 
researcher’s contact details for queries/problem -solving.  San Juan et al. (2007 ) mobilised 
social support through initiating group games used to maintain a nd improve adherence to the 
training intervention  and through making each session different. Sharkey et al. (1993 ) 
assessed family -level PA participation at baseline, as well as individual -level PA to assess 
their competence and motivation to take on home exercise  intervention , PA education 
intervention  or sports.  Despite the diversity in countries for the intervention settings, n one of 
the studies described cultural issues or activities as part of their interventions.  
Discussion  
This paper provides a narra tive synthesis  of the available evidence on the social 
ecological aspects of interventions designed to support children and young people living with 
and beyond cancer to be more active , which can be used as a conceptual model for the 
development of future interventions . Our systematic review of the available evidence showed 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
18 
 that eight studies  reported an overall increase or maintenance  in PA following participation in 
the interven tions and nine  showed sustained improvements in PA at follow up (range 1-12 
months) . Study quality overall was low-moderate ; with most studies designs being  
exploratory studies of pilot or feasibility interventions. This is reflective of the current stage 
of the  evidence base , since  most of the studies sought to explor e the a cceptability and 
feasibility of exercise interventio ns and no well -powered definitive trials  assess ing the 
outcomes and effectiveness  of trials  are yet in existence .  
In recognition that improving PA in this population is a result of the interplay of a  
wide range of  factors, we  reviewed the intervention features using the social ecological model 
as this  has been used to determine the predictors of PA in children and yo ung people living 
beyond cancer  (Takken et al., 2016 ). We present a narrative synthesis  of the intervention 
study features which discusses constructs that emerged from the  Gilliam and Schwebel 
(2013 ) review as unique predictors of PA, as well as BCT coding . This approach is consistent 
with ecological systems t heory ( Bronfenbrenner , 1979; Kazack, 1989 ) and emphasises the 
role of multiple biopsychosocial interactive influences on children  and adolescents’ PA.  
In terms of behavioural intervention components, w e found that interventions 
commonly utilised BCTs rela ted to the delivery of PA interventions, which were instruction 
on how to perform PA/exercise, demonstration of the behaviour, behavioural 
practice/rehearsal and credible source (usually in the form of an exercise professional).  Few 
studies utilised BCTs o n social support, despite this being one of the key predictors of PA in 
this population. Where social support was part of the intervention, this took the form of 
parental participation and encouragement and peer support from other young people living 
with and beyond cancer who were enrolled on the interventions. Environmental factors play a 
key role in determining the adoption and maintenance of PA behaviour change. Interventions 
named  the environmental setting but did not explicitly discuss how the intervention 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
19 
 environment was used to improve PA. F urther intervention work should consider the 
influence of environmental factors on short - and long -term behaviour change (i.e. how can 
the individuals’ environment be optimised to increase P A e.g. identifying suitable walking 
routes, creating space for PA). Whilst cognitive factors (in the form of intentions, self -
efficacy, fatigue and QoL) were measured in the majority of interventions, on ly one 
intervention assisted individuals in consideri ng the role of their beliefs, perceived behavioural 
control and intentions to start and maintain PA as part of their on -going care. None of the 
interventions delivered emotional or affect components despite the high need for 
psychological support as part o f cancer care ( Aldiss, Fern, Phillips, Callaghan , Dyker  et al., 
2019, TYAC, 2015 ). Developing high quality interventions that support psychological health 
in terms of self -esteem, confidence and reducing negative affect are key priorities for future 
interv ention development work.  
Providing tailored, personalised PA plans to create and sustain long term behaviour 
change  
Our review highlights three main implications  for developing PA interventions for 
children and young people living with and beyond cancer.  
Insert figure 3 about here  
Firstly, there is a need to develop theory -based interventions that address each of the domains 
of the social ecological model. The benefits of theory to develop and test behaviour change 
interventions (Prestwich , Kenworthy & Conner, 2017) are:  
• Theory allows us to identify the key constructs (determinants) to target within an 
intervention; if there is evidence that constructs (self -efficacy, attitudes etc) are 
associated with health behaviour change, then changing  these constructs should result 
in behaviour change.  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
20 
 • Theory can help select appropriate intervention techniques by guiding which BCTs 
should be used to improve intervention effectiveness  
• Theory can be used to refine or tailor intervention techniques and th eories e.g. 
attitudes and perceived behavioural control (PBC) are purported to be determinants of 
physical activity in this target group (Gilliam & Schwebel, 2013). In this way, theory 
can be used to tailor interventions. For example, an individual who has  a positive 
attitude towards physical activity scores low on PBC will have different intervention 
needs to an individual who has a high level of  PBC but negative attitude towards 
physical activity.  
Designing and implementing interventions with a theoretica l basis means we can 
continually test the theory and identify the contexts and populations for which it is most 
effective. Through these processes, we can refine the theory and seek to build a case for the 
generalisability of the theory. Whilst the evidenc e that using theory improves the efficacy of 
health behaviour change interventions is mixed (Prestwich, Sniehotta, Wittington, 
Drombrowski et al., 2014; Prestwich, Webb & Conner, 2015), by seeking to understand the 
mechanisms of action of BCTs and designin g clear logic models, we can build an incremental 
science for understanding why an intervention may work.  
Our review found that overall the interventions address the medical, demographic and 
behavioural domains, but need to do more to address the environme ntal, social and cognitive -
emotional domains that influence health behaviour change. To date, much of the intervention 
work in the area has not considered a psychosocial theoretical basis, with one exception 
(Keats & Culos -Reed, 2009). It is noteworthy tha t some interventions that were not theory 
based instead measured outcomes using social cognition theoretical models, such as the 
Social Cognitive Theory (SCT), the Transtheoretical Model (TTM) and the Health Belief 
Model (HBM). It is important to match int erventions and outcome measures according to the 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
21 
 theory and thus measures closely to the target behaviour as possible (Johnston, Dixon, Hart, 
Glidewell, Schröder et al., 2014). In our review, it was not possible to conduct analysis by 
behaviour change tech niques in relation to a given outcome (e.g. aerobic exercise tolerance) 
and well -powered intervention trials will allow this in the future. It is noteworthy that the 
interventions frequently consisted of instruction on how to exercise from a credible sourc e, 
demonstration, and providing opportunities for rehearsal, with little consideration of the 
underlying psychological aspects of changing behaviour. Whilst the use of theory is variable 
amongst PA behaviour change interventions (Howlett, Trivedi, Troop & Chater, 2018; 
Prestwich, Sniehotta, Whittington, Dombrowski, Rogers,  & Michie, 2014), the lack of 
interventions based on a theoretical model in this review is a concern and remains a priority 
for future intervention development. Our review and model recom mends the development of 
theory based psychosocial interventions and embedding evidence -based health psychology 
techniques and therapies into interventions. The model recommends including these 
alongside a wider range of determinants of PA by including beh avioural, cultural, 
environmental and medical domains.  
Many exercise oncology studies have found that post intervention improvements in PA 
are not sustained  beyond the length of the intervention and available support , and 
interventions often lack psychosocial aspects of behaviour change ( Bourke, Homer, Thaha, 
Steed, Rosario et al., 2014 ). Teaching psychological strategies for goal setting and 
overcoming chall enges may help to sustain motivation and health behaviour change beyond 
the effects of the intervention. Mental contrasting has recently been found to be effective for 
health behaviour change and sustained for as long as two years in a recent meta -analysis  
(Cross & Sheffield, 2019 ) with similar effects found for implementation intentions 
(Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006 ) and self -affirmation ( Epton, Harris, Kane, van Koningsbruggen 
& Sheeran , 2015 ).   
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
22 
 Secondly, interventions should recognise that physical activi ty is not necessarily the 
single and most vital factor determining treatment success, but rather it is emphasised  as a 
way to improve quality of life and wellbeing. On a practical level, interventions should be 
delivered within the context of a patient’s life, in recognition of the often -debilitating effects 
of chemotherapy, surgery, and radiotherapy that might other wise prevent patients from 
participating in exercise, a home and work life that might already be hard pressed to find time 
for exercise, and the need for an appropriate support network to encourage exercise as a 
feasible and sustainable treatment option.   
Clearer theoretical descriptions and intervention reporting using the TIDIER checklist 
will help strengthen the evidence base, by allowing easier replication of effective approaches 
and clearer explanations  for secondary analyses (Hoffman et al., 2014; How lett et al., 2018 ). 
Developments in agreeing standard measurements for fatigue and QoL, as well as reliable 
measurements for assessing PA levels (specificity, etc .) are also needed to draw accurate 
comparisons across interventions . With the optimal frequen cy, dose and type of exercise for 
children and young people living with and beyond cancer under debate, tailoring of 
intervention is important in terms of both physical and psychological strategies. In our  
TIDIER analysis, we found that two  interventions t ailored the PA prescription to the 
participant  but did not provide specific details about the nature of the tailoring; this has 
important clinical implications as there are larg e within -person variations for PA (due to low 
motivation due to fatigue, treatm ents, negative affect or  side effects) . We recommend that 
future studies publish details of the need, rationale and approach used for tailoring in order to 
develop an incremental science evidence base in this area.  To avoid selective reporting bias, 
studie s should pre -register their protocols and outcome measures and publish full results and 
anonymised datasets.  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
23 
  Thirdly, adoption of the  BCT taxonomy is recommended for future reporting to guide 
our understanding of which BCTs are important for supporting th is population with 
behaviour change  but this should be used in conjunction with addressing the other domains of 
the model, particularly the cognitive -emotional . Whilst cognitive and emotional factors have 
received substantial attention as predictors of PA in the childhood cancer literature ( Cox, 
Montgomery, Oeffinger , Leisenring , Zeltzer , et al., 2011; Finnegan, Wilkie, Wilbur , 
Campbell et al., 2007 ), only one intervention was based on a psychological theory  that 
addressed some of these factors . Additionally, the p ublication of intervention manuals and 
protocols , multidisciplinary collaboration and reflective reports of lessons learned during 
intervention development, testing  and implementation are  also recommended to ensure 
progression in this ar ea. 
Limitations of the review  
It is recognised that most of the intervention studies were exploratory or 
feasibility/pilot studies, with small samples and low statistical power and this limits our 
ability to draw conclusions from the study outcomes. These issues highlight the difficulties in 
researching young cancer populations , which include difficulties in obtaining consent 
(Dixon -Woods et al., 2006)  and challenges in retaining participants re cruited to studies due to 
changes in health status  or functiona l ability (Fiuza -Luces et al., 2016 ; Muller et al., 2015).  
Few interventions were adequately reported, thus limiting our ability to determine the 
influence of intervention components. Some of the interventions highlighted a bias in 
selective reporting and thus, pre -registration of study outcomes and intervention design are 
recommended. It is also acknowledged that although coding of BCTs was bas ed on study 
reports, it is possible that some BCTs may have been implemented but not reported.  Similar 
to the pre sent review, Howlett et al., ( 2018 ) reported a number of studies that were judged as 
having high risk of bias or were judged as being unclear due to the lack of clear reporting. To 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
24 
 ensure transparency, replication and robust evaluation, w e recommend that future studies use 
the TIDieR templ ate (Template for  Intervention Description and R eplication) framework 
(Hoffman et al., 2014 ) for accurate reporting of the intervention content. Using the social 
ecological model in conjunction with TIDIER will help contribute towards the pressing need 
for transparency in all stages of intervention design, delivery, evaluation and implementation 
to ensure progression in t his area.  
Most of the interventions described in the review are pilot  and f easibility  studies , 
which is a r eflect ion of  many of the challe nges in researching young cancer populations, 
including  difficulties in obtaining consent (Dixon -Woods et al., 2006) and barrier s in 
retaining participants recruited to studies due to changes in health status or functional ability 
(Fiuza -Luces et al., 2016 ; Muller et al., 2015). In addition, it is acknowledged that designing 
interventions that target all areas of the socio -ecological model  demands intense  resource s 
and time. There are further challenges in terms of the implementation of these interventions 
as definitive RCTs and established evidence of clinical and cost effectiveness do not exist. 
Furthermore, it is difficult to determin e and measure  the important clinical differences in 
terms of biopsychosocial outcomes as a result of PA in this population.   
To the review authors' knowledge, this is still the most comprehensive systematic 
review of psychosocial -ecological  aspects of interventions to support PA for children and 
young people living with and beyond cancer. The psychosocial -ecological approach 
undertaken in this review goes beyond traditional psychosocial aspects by including 
environment, medical, demographic factors  and the work extends other revi ews by coding 
and classifying BCTs . Recent systematic reviews provide evidence for other BCTs that have 
not yet been considered with child and young adult living with and beyond cancer 
populations. A recent systematic review of exercise behaviour intervent ions in sedentary 
cancer adult cohorts (Turner, Steed, Quirk, Greasley, Saxton, Taylor et al., 2018) found that a 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
25 
 number of behaviour change techniques (BCTs) were identified in studies which achieved 
75% adherence to the aerobic or resistance guidelines (i.e. at least 150 minutes per week of 
aerobic exercise  ,two resistance strengthening sessions per week) for adults with cancer . 
Similar to this review, the m ost commonly reported BCTs were ‘goal setting,’ ‘instruction on 
how to perform  the behaviour’ and ‘setting graded tasks ’. Finne,  Glausch, Exner, Sauzet, 
Stölzel and Seidel (2018) found that the BCTs ‘prompts’, ‘reduce prompts ’, ‘graded tasks’, 
‘non-specific reward ’, and ‘social reward ’ were significantly related to larger effect sizes  in 
favour of increas ing physical activity  while ‘information about health consequences ’ and 
‘information about emotional consequences ’, as well as ‘social comparison ’ were related to 
smaller effect sizes.  Howlett  et al. ‘s (2018) systematic review and meta ‐analysis of PA 
interventions for healthy inactive adults reported that interventi ons that included BCTs of 
'biofeedback', 'demonstration of the behaviour', 'behaviour practice/rehearsal'  and 'setting of 
graded tasks' demonstrated larger effect sizes for PA outcomes than studies without these 
BCTs In summary, this was t he first review to examine the psychosocial ecological 
components of physical activity interventions for children and young people living with and 
beyond cancer, and explore the BCTs utilised. The findings of this review suggest three 
priorities for enhanci ng the effectiveness of PA interventions  for young people living with 
and beyond cancer: 1) theory -based interventions that address each psychosocial -ecological 
framework domain 2) creation of tailored psychosocial -ecological strategies for the 
individual 3) pre -registration of study methods, outcomes and intervention protocols.  
 
References  
Ajzen I. (2002). Perceived behavioral control, self ‐efficacy, locus of control, and the theory 
of planned behavior 1. Journal of applied social psychology.  2002 Apr;32(4 ):665 -83. 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
26 
 Aldiss , S., Fern , L.A., Phillips , R.S., Callaghan , A., Dyker , K., Gravestock , H., Groszmann , 
M., Hamrang , .L, Hough , R., McGeachy, D, Morgan , S. (2019) Research priorities for 
young people with cancer: a UK priority setting partnership with the James Lind 
Alliance. BMJ open . 2019 Jul 1;9(8):e028119.  
Baumann , F.T., Bloch , W., and Beulertz ,  J. (2013). Clinical exercise interventions in 
pediatric oncology: a systematic review. Pediatric research . Oct;74(4):366.  
Beulertz , J, Prokop , A, Rustler , V, Bloch , W, Felsch , M and Baumann , F.T. (2016)  Effects of 
a 6‐Month, Group ‐Based, Therapeutic Exercise Program for Childhood Cancer 
Outpatients on Motor Performance, Level of Activity, and Quality of Life. Pediatric 
blood & cancer . Jan;63(1):127 -32. 
Braam, K. I., van der Torre, P., Takken, T., Veening, M. A., van Dulmen ‐den Broed er, E., & 
Kaspers, G. J. (2016). Physical exercise training interventions for children and young 
adults during and after treatment for childhood cancer.  Cochrane database of 
systematic reviews , (3).  
Bronfenbrenner , U. (1979). The ecology of human developme nt. Harvard University Press; 
USA.  
Bourke , L, Homer , K.E, Thaha , M.A, Steed , L, Rosario , D.J, Robb , K.A, Saxton , J.M, 
Taylor , S.J. (2014).  Interventions to improve exercise behaviour in sedentary people 
living with and beyond cancer : a systematic review. British Journal of C ancer.  
Feb;110(4):831.   
Butterfield , R.M., Park , E.R., Puleo, E. , Mertens , A, Gritz , ER,  Li, F.P and  Emmons , K. 
(2004) Multiple risk behaviors among smokers in the childhood cancer survivors study 
cohort. Psycho‐Oncology . Sep;13(9):619 -29.;  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
27 
 Cox, C.L., Montgomery, M., Oeffinger, K.C., Leisenring, W., Zeltzer , L., Whitton, J.A., 
Mertens, A.C., Hudson, M..M and Robison, L.L. (2009). Promoting physical activity 
in childhood cancer survivors: results from the Childhood Cancer Survivor Study. 
Cancer.  Feb 1;115(3):642 -54. 
Cramp, F, and Byron‐Daniel, J.(2012).  Exer cise for the management of cancer‐related 
fatigue in adults. Cochrane database of systematic reviews . (11).  
Cross , A, Sheffield , D. Mental contrasting for health behaviour change: a systematic review 
and meta -analysis of effects and moderator variables. Health Psychology Review.  
2019 Apr 3;13(2):209 -25.  
Demark‐Wahnefried , W., Werner , C., Clipp , E.C, Guill , A.B, Bonner , M, Jones , L.W, 
Rosoff , P.M. (2005)  Survivors of childhood cancer and their guardians: current health 
behaviors and receptivity to health promotio n programs. Cancer.  May 
15;103(10):2171 -80. 
Dixon -Woods, M., Young, B., & Ross, E. (2006). Researching chronic childhood illness: the 
example of childhood cancer.  Chronic Illness , 2(3), 165 -177. 
Dombrowski, S. U., Knittle, K., Avenell, A., Araújo -Soares, V., & Sniehotta, F. F. (2014). 
BCT and theory use in interventions targeting initiation and maintenance of weight 
loss: Systematic review.  The Eur opean Health Psychologist,  16. 
Epton , T, Harris , P.R, Kane , R, van Koningsbruggen , G.M, Sheeran , P. (2015). The impact of 
self-affirmation on health -behavior change: A meta -analysis. Health Psychology . 
Mar;34(3):187.  
Finne, E., Glausch , M., Exner, A. K., Sauzet, O., Stoelzel, F., & Seidel, N. (2018). Behavior 
Change Techniques for increasing Physical Activity in Cancer Survivors. A 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
28 
 Systematic Review and Meta -analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.  Cancer 
Management and Research , 10. 
Finnegan , L, Wilkie , D.J., Wilbur , J., Campbell , R.T, Zong , S., Katula , S.  (2007). Correlates 
of physical activity in young adult survivors of childhood cancers. In  Oncology 
nursing forum 2007 Sep 18 (Vol. 34, No. 5, pp. E60 -E69). Oncology Nursing Society.  
Fiuza -Luces C, Padilla JR, Valentín J, Santana -Sosa E, Santos -Lozano A, Sanchis -Gomar F, 
Pareja -Galeano H, Morales JS, Fleck SJ, Pérez M, Lassaletta A. (2017). Effects of 
exercise on the immune function of pediatric patients with solid tumors: insights fr om 
the PAPEC randomized trial. American Journal of Physical Medicine & 
Rehabilitation . 2017 Nov 1;96(11):831 -7.  
French, D. P., Olander, E. K., Chisholm, A., & Mc Sharry, J. (2014). Which behaviour 
change techniques are most effective at increasing older a dults’ self -efficacy and 
physical activity behaviour? A systematic review.  Annals of Behavioral 
Medicine , 48(2), 225 -234. 
Gilliam , M.B. and  Schwebel , D.C.(2013).  Physical activity in child and adolescent canc er 
survivors: a review. Health Psychology Review . Mar 1;7(1):92 -110. 
Gollwitzer , P.M., Sheeran , P. (2006). Implementation intentions and goal achievement: A 
meta‐analysis of effe cts and processes. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology.  
Jan 1;38:69 -119. 
Higgins JP, Altman DG, Gøtzsche PC, Jüni  P, Moher D, Oxman AD, Savović J, Schulz KF, 
Weeks L, Sterne JA. The Cochrane Collaboration’s tool for assessing risk of bias in 
randomised trials. BMJ.  Oct 18;343:d5928.   
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
29 
 Hinkley , T., Crawford, D., Salmon , J, Okely , A.D and Hesketh , K (2008) . Preschool ch ildren 
and physical activity: a review of correlates. American Journal of P reventive 
Medicine.  May 1;34(5):435 -41. 
Hoffmann , TC, Glasziou PP, Boutron I, Milne R, Perera  R, Moher D, Altman DG, Barbour 
V, Macdonald H, Johnston M, Lamb SE. (2014). Better reporting of interventions: 
template for intervention description and replication (TIDieR) checklist and guide. 
BMJ . Mar 7;348:g1687.  
Howlett , N., Trivedi , D., Troop , N.A., Chater , A.M.. (2018). Are physical activity 
interventions for healthy inactive adults effective in promoting behavior change and 
maintenance, and which behavior change techniques are effective? A systematic 
review an d meta -analysis. Translational Behavior al Medicine.  Feb 28;9(1):147 -57. 
Johnston , M, Dixon , D, Hart , J, Glidewel ,l L, Schröder , C and Pollard , B. (2014).  
Discriminant content validity: A quantitative methodology for assessing content of 
theory‐based measures, with illu strative applications. British Journal of Health 
Psychology . May;19(2):240 -57. 
Järvelä , LS, Kemppainen J, Niinikoski H, Hannukainen JC, Läht eenmäki PM, Kapanen J, 
Arola M, Heinonen OJ. (2012). Effects of a home ‐based exercise program on 
metabolic risk factors and fitness in long ‐term survivors of childhood acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia. Pediatric blood & cancer. 2012 Jul 15;59(1):155 -60. 
Kazak , A.E. (1989). Families of chronically ill children: a systems and social -ecological 
model of adaptation and challenge. Journal of Consulting and Clinical P sychology. 
Feb;57(1):25.  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
30 
 Keats , M.R., Culos‐Reed , S.N, Courneya , K.S., McBride , M. (2007). Understanding physical 
activity in adolescent cancer survivors: An application of the theory of planned 
behavior. Psycho‐Oncology . May;16(5):448 -57.  
Keats, M. R., & Culos -Reed, S. N. (2008). A community -based physical activity program for 
adolescents with  cancer (project TREK): program feasibility and preliminary 
findings.  Journal of Pediatric H ematology/oncology , 30(4), 272 -280.  
Keats MR, Culos -Reed N. (2009) A theory -driven approach to encourage physical activity in 
pediatric cancer survivors: a pilot study. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology.  
Apr 1;31(2):267 -83. 
Michie , S, Richardson , M, Johnston, M, Abraham, C, Francis , J, Hardeman , W, Eccles , MP, 
Cane , J and Wood , C.E (2013) . The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 
hierarchically clustered techniques: building an international consensus for the 
reporting of behavior c hange interventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine . Mar 
20;46(1):81 -95 
Michi e, S., Ashford, S., Sniehotta, F. F., Dombrowski, S. U., Bishop, A., & French, D. P. 
(2011). A refined taxonomy of behaviour change techniques to help people change 
their physical activity and healthy eating behaviours: the CALO -RE 
taxonomy.  Psychology & h ealth , 26(11), 1479 -1498.  
Michie, S., & Johnston, M. (2012). Theories and techniques of behaviour change: Developing 
a cumulative science of behaviour change.  Health Psychology Review, 6, 1-16. doi: 
10.1080/17437199.2012.654964  
Mishra, S.I., Scherer, R.W., Snyder, C, Geigle, P, Gotay, C. (2014). Are exercise programs 
effective for improving health -related quality of life among cancer survivors ? A 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
31 
 systematic review and meta -analysis. In Oncology nursing forum  Nov 1 (Vol. 41, No. 
6, p. E326). NIH Public Access.  
Müller , C, Krauth , KA, Gerß J and Rosenbaum D. (2016). Physical activity and health -
related quality of life in pediatric cancer patients following a 4 -week inpatient 
rehabilitation program. Supportive Care in Cancer. 2016 Sep 1;24(9):3793 -802. 
Pinto , B.M. and  Trunzo , J.(2005) . Health behaviors during and a fter a cancer diagnosis. 
Cancer.  Dec 1;104(S11):2614 -23. 
Prestwich , A., Sniehotta , F.F., Whittington , C., Dombrowski , S.U., Rogers , L, Michie, S. 
(2014). Does theory influence the effectiveness of health behavior interventions? 
Meta -analysis. Health Psychology . 2014 May;33(5):465.   
Prestwich, A., Webb, T. L., & Conner, M. (201 5). Using theory to develop and test 
interventions to promote changes in health behaviour: evidence, issues, and 
recommendations.  Current Opinion in Psychology , 5, 1-5. 
Prestwich, A., Kenworthy, J., & Conner, M. (2017).  Health behavior  change: Theories, 
methods and interventions . Routledge.  
Prochaska JO, Velicer WF. (1997).  The transtheoretical model of health behavior change. 
American Journal of Health P romotion.  Sep;12(1):38 -48. 
Puhan MA, Schünemann HJ, Murad MH, Li T, Brignardello -Petersen R, Singh JA, Kessels 
AG, Guyatt GH. (2014).  A GRADE Working Group approach for rating the quality of 
treatment effect estimates from network meta -analysis. BMJ . 2014 Sep 24;349:g5630.  
Rock , C.L., Doyle , C, Demark ‐Wahnefried ,W, Meyerhardt , J, Courneya , K.S., Schwartz , 
A.L., Bandera , E.V., Hamilton , K.K., Grant , B., McCullough , M, Byers , T.(2012).  
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
32 
 Nutrition and physical activity guidelines for cancer survivors. CA: a cancer journal 
for clinicians.  Jul;62(4):242 -74. 
Rosipal , N.C., Mingle, L, Smith, J and Morris, G.S. (2013). Assessment of voluntary exercise 
behavior and active video gaming among adolescent and young adult patients during 
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Journal of Pediatric Oncology Nursing . 
Jan;30(1 ):24-33. 
Samdal, G. B., Eide, G. E., Barth, T., Williams, G., & Meland, E. (2017). Effective behaviour 
change techniques for physical activity and healthy eating in overweight and obese 
adults; systematic review and meta -regression analyses.  International Journal of 
Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity , 14(1), 42.  
Sabiston, C. M., & Brunet, J. (2012). Reviewing the benefits of physical activity during 
cancer survivorship.  American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine , 6(2), 167 -177. 
 
Sallis, J.  F., Prochaska, J. J., & Taylor, W. C. (2000). A review of correlates of physical 
activity of children and adolescents.  Medicine and science in sports and 
exercise , 32(5), 963 -975.;  
San Juan , A.F, Fleck, S.J, Chamorro -Viña C, Maté -Muñoz JL, Moral S, Per ez M, Cardona C, 
Del Valle MF, Hernandez M, Ramírez M, Madero L. (2007). Effects of an intra -
hospital exercise program intervention for children with leukemia. Medicine & 
Science in Sports & Exercise . Jan 1;39(1):13 -21 
Sharkey , A.M., Carey , A.B., Heise , C.T and Barber, G. (1993). Cardiac rehabilitation after 
cancer therapy in children and young adults. The American Journal of Cardiology . 
Jun 15;71(16):1488 -90. 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
33 
 Shea BJ, Grimshaw JM, Wells GA, Boers M, Andersson N, Hamel C, Porter AC, Tugwell P, 
Moher D, Bou ter LM. (2007). Development of AMSTAR: a measurement tool to 
assess the methodological quality of systematic reviews. BMC medical research 
methodology . Dec;7(1):10.  
Sterne JA, Hernán MA, Reeves BC, Savović J, Berkman ND, Viswanathan M, Henry D, 
Altman DG, Ansari MT, Boutron I, Carpenter JR. ROBINS -I: a tool for assessing risk 
of bias in non -randomised studies of interventions. BMJ . 2016 Oct 12;355:i4919.  
Stolley, M.R, Restrepo , J and  Sharp , L.K.(2010).  Diet and physical activity in childhood 
cancer survivor s: a review of the literature. Annals of Behavioral Medicine . Jun 
1;39(3):232 -49. 
Takken T, van der Torre P, Zwerink M, Hulzebos EH, Bierings M, Helders PJ, van der Net J. 
(2009). Development, feasibility and efficacy of a community ‐based exercise training 
program in pediatric cancer survivors. Psycho‐Oncology : Apr;18(4):440 -8. 
Tanir , M.K and  Kuguoglu , S. (2013). Impact of exercise on lower activity levels in children 
with acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a randomized controlled trial fr om Turkey. 
Rehabilitation N ursing . 2013 Jan;38(1):48 -59.  
Taylor , W.C, and Sallis J .F. (1997) Determinants of physical activity in children. World 
Review of Nutrition and Di etetics. Jan 1;82:159 -67. 
Teenage Young Adult Cancer (TYAC) (2015). Blueprint for care. Accessed from 
https://www.teenagecancertrust.org/sites/default/files/BlueprintOfCare_2ndEdit ion.pd
f 
Turner , R.R., Steed , L, Quirk , H, Greasley , R.U., Saxton , J.M., Taylor , S.J, Rosario , D.J, 
Thaha , M.A, Bourke , L. (2018).  Interventions for promoting habitual exercise in 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
34 
 people living with and beyond cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews . 
2018(9).  
Vallet, C, André , N, Gentet JC, Verschuur A, Michel G, Sotteau F, Martha C, Grélot L. 
(2015). Pilot evaluation of physical and psychological effects of a physical trek 
programme including a dog sledding expedition in children and teenagers with cancer. 
E- Cancer Medical Science . 2015;9.  
Winter C, Müller C, Brandes M, Brinkmann A, Hoffmann C, Hardes  J, Gosheger G, Boos J, 
Rosenbaum D. Level of activity in children undergoing cancer treatment. Pediatric 
blood & cancer . 2009 Sep;53(3):438 -43 
Yeh CH, Wai JP, Lin US, Chiang YC . (2011) . A pilot study to examine the feasibility and 
effects of a home -based aerobic program on reducing fatigue in children with acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia. Cancer nursing . Jan 1;34(1):3 -12. 
 
Conflict of Interests:  
 
None  
 
 
 
 
CANCER PHYSICAL ACTIVITY INTERVENTIONS  
 
35 
  
