STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
Brief cognitive behavioral therapy in primary care:
a hybrid type 2 patient-randomized
effectiveness-implementation design
Jeffrey A Cully1,2,3,4*, Maria E A Armento1,3, Juliette Mott1,2,3, Michael R Nadorff1,3, Aanand D Naik1,4,
Melinda A Stanley1,2,3, Kristen H Sorocco5,6, Mark E Kunik1,2,3,4, Nancy J Petersen1,4and Michael R Kauth1,2,3
Abstract
Background: Despite the availability of evidence-based psychotherapies for depression and anxiety, they are
underused in non-mental health specialty settings such as primary care. Hybrid effectiveness-implementation
designs have the potential to evaluate clinical and implementation outcomes of evidence-based psychotherapies to
improve their translation into routine clinical care practices.
Methods: This protocol article discusses the study methodology and implementation strategies employed in an
ongoing, hybrid, type 2 randomized controlled trial with two primary aims: (1) to determine whether a brief,
manualized cognitive behavioral therapy administered by Veterans Affairs Primary Care Mental Health Integration
program clinicians is effective in treating depression and anxiety in a sample of medically ill (chronic
cardiopulmonary diseases) primary care patients and (2) to examine the acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary
outcomes of a focused implementation strategy on improving adoption and fidelity of brief cognitive behavioral
therapy at two Primary Care-Mental Health Integration clinics. The study uses a hybrid type 2 effectiveness/
implementation design to simultaneously test clinical effectiveness and to collect pilot data on a multifaceted
implementation strategy that includes an online training program, audit and feedback of session content, and
internal and external facilitation. Additionally, the study engages the participation of an advisory council consisting
of stakeholders from Primary Care-Mental Health Integration, as well as regional and national mental health leaders
within the Veterans Administration. It targets recruitment of 320 participants randomized to brief cognitive
behavioral therapy (n = 200) or usual care (n = 120). Both effectiveness and implementation outcomes are being
assessed using mixed methods, including quantitative evaluation ( e.g., intent-to-treat analyses across multiple time
points) and qualitative methods ( e.g., focus interviews and surveys from patients and providers). Patient-
effectiveness outcomes include measures of depression, anxiety, and physical health functioning using blinded
independent evaluators. Implementation outcomes include patient engagement and adherence and clinician brief
cognitive behavioral therapy adoption and fidelity.
Conclusions: Hybrid designs are needed to advance clinical effectiveness and implementation knowledge to
improve healthcare practices. The current article describes the rationale and challenges associated with the use of a
hybrid design for the study of brief cognitive behavioral therapy in primary care. Although trade-offs exist between
scientific control and external validity, hybrid designs are part of an emerging approach that has the potential to
rapidly advance both science and practice.
* Correspondence: jcully@bcm.edu
1Houston VA HSR&D Center of Excellence, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center,
Houston, TX, USA
2VA South Central Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinic al Center (a virtual
center), USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2012 Cully et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
Trial registration: NCT01149772 at http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT01149772
Keywords: Primary care, Hybrid effectiveness-implementation designs, Cognitive behavioral therapy, Mental health,
Veterans, Anxiety, Depression
Background
Traditional cognitive behavior al therapy (CBT), consisting
of 12 to 16 sessions over three to six months of treatment,
is an efficacious treatment for depression and anxiety [1-5].
Much of the research on CBT has been conducted in aca-
demic trials and within specialty mental healthcare settings
[6,7]. Less is known about the utilization of brief CBT
(bCBT), consisting of four to six sessions over a maximum
of four months, and its ability to be adopted within non-
mental healthcare settings such as primary care. Treatment
modalities like bCBT can dramatically enhance the reach
of mental illness therapy, given the prevalence and morbid-
ity of depression and anxiety among medically ill patients.
Although psychotherapies such as CBT improve patient
outcomes, such treatments a re infrequently used within
integrated healthcare settings, especially in non-specialty
mental healthcare settings such as primary care [8-11]. In
an effort to improve the availability of psychotherapy, the
Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) issued the Uniform
Mental Health Services Handbook in 2008 [12], which
mandated that VA medical centers embed mental health
services into primary care settings and make available
evidence-based psychotherapies for all veterans with de-
pression and anxiety. Since 2008, the VA has promoted a
national dissemination program called Primary Care-
Mental Health Integration (PC-MHI) for all its hospitals
and large community-based clinics and has also dedicated
significant resources toward cl inician training in traditional
evidence-based psychotherapi es, including CBT, using a 12-
to 16-session approach [4,13,14].
Unfortunately, mental health providers in the primary
care setting face challenges to implementation of traditional
evidence-based psychotherapies. Evidence suggests that
patients treated in primary care are distinct from specialty
mental healthcare patients ( e.g., present with physical health
concerns and fewer chronic and severe mental health diffi-
culties) and require modifications to traditional approaches
[15,16]. Data also suggest that primary care patients may
benefit from mental health inter ventions that are less inten-
sive and focus treatment around physical as well as emo-
tional health concerns [17-19]. These patients may also
prefer and engage more fully in care co-located in primary
care [20,21]. Lastly, VA PC-MHI providers require assist-
ance to determine how best to modify traditional evidence-
based therapies to better align with the practice demands
of the primary care setting, which are increasingly involving
collaborations between mental and physical health provi-
ders ( e.g., medical home or the Patient-Aligned Care Teaminitiative within the VA). For example, in the VA PC-MHI
program, clinicians are asked to provide evidence-based
care ( e.g.,1 2–16 sessions of CBT) within an integrated
primary care model that encour ages psychotherapy services
in the range of four to six sessions of care [11,22,23]. Pres-
ently, mental health providers in primary care are strug-
gling to adapt traditional evidence-based approaches, and
they need data to support their delivery of high-quality
care.
Initial studies provide evidence that bCBT is an effective
treatment within primary care for depression, panic, and
generalized anxiety disorders [17,18,24-27]. Although
studies support the general efficacy of bCBT, additional ef-
fectiveness data are needed to determine the impact of
these treatments under real-world conditions and to
understand the potential for bCBT to be integrated within
primary care.
Using blended effectiveness-implementation designs to
improve the provision of evidence-based psychotherapy
It is imperative that research focus on increasing use of
evidence-based interventions in frontline practice [28].
Unfortunately, significant time and resources are required
by the traditional sequential scientific approach that
moves from clinical efficacy to effectiveness and then im-
plementation [29], and this approach is often plagued by
practice or translational barriers because of the mismatch
between the scientific intervention and the demands of
frontline practice [9]. Hybrid designs are increasingly
being used to move science beyond an excessive attention
to internal validity. Clinical-intervention hybrid designs
are commonly employed on the efficacy/effectiveness con-
tinuum [9,30] and generally provide more relaxed internal
controls to improve generalizability. Hybrid effectiveness/
implementation (E-I) designs [31]are relatively new, with
distinct methodological opportunities and challenges. Hy-
brid E-I designs address clinical effectiveness but target
the methods and procedures necessary to deliver and sus-
tain interventions in real-world care settings. As a pre-
requisite, hybrid E-I designs require a minimum of
“indirect evidence ”supporting a clinical intervention [31].
Without preexisting evidence to support the clinical inter-
vention, implementation evaluation is premature.
As proposed by Curran et al. [31], hybrid E-I studies in-
clude a continuum of designs that move from effectiveness
research with minimal implementation strategies (type 1)
to designs where effectiveness and implementation are
equally balanced (type 2) to a largely implementationCully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 2 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
approach with minimal focus on effectiveness outcomes
(type 3) (Figure 1). The determination of which hybrid E-I
design to choose is based on curr ent literature and practice
patterns.
Prototypical clinical and implementation research
designs do not share many design features. Thus, a seriesof compromises are needed when creating and conducting
a hybrid E-I study to balance the demands associated with
scientific control or internal validity and factors associatedwith implementation, such as evaluation and improve-
ment of processes and systems of care. Although com-
promise between these competing constructs may provechallenging, hybrid designs have the potential to (1)
shorten the existing lag time between research discovery
and uptake in care settings, (2) provide additional know-ledge of clinical processes and system factors critical to
adoption and long-term utilization, and (3) reduce cost by
streamlining and combining elements of the traditionalstep-wise progression of research (efficacy to effectiveness
to implementation) [31]. Most importantly, hybrid E-I
designs that use strong and broad-reaching partnershipsimprove the collective shared vision among stakeholders
and, ultimately, improve the odds that interventions devel-
oped will be adopted into practice.
Evaluation of hybrid E-I designs involves careful atten-
tion to the assessment of outcomes related to both clin-
ical effectiveness and implementation success. RE-AIMis a commonly used framework to aid in addressing the
unique challenges of blended E-I designs [32-36]. RE-
AIM seeks to enhance evaluation and reduce the dispar-ities between research, applied clinical practice, and sus-
tainability of evidence-based practices over time [28,34]
by focusing on five components: Reach (the participa-
tion rate of the targeted population), Efficacy/ Effective-
ness (the impact of the intervention on outcome
criteria), Adoption (number or proportion of sites/clini-
cians who provide the clinical intervention), Implemen-
tation (intervention integrity, quality, and consistency of
delivery), and Maintenance (sustainability of the inter-
vention over time).This protocol article describes a hybrid type 2 study,
entitled “Cognitive Behavioral Therapy in Primary Care:
Treating the Medically Ill. ”Consistent with the hybrid
E-I design [31] and informed by the RE-AIM framework
[34], the project focuses on the effectiveness of bCBT for
patient outcomes related to depression, anxiety, andphysical health, while also seeking to simultaneously
pilot test the acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary
outcomes of a multifaceted implementation strategy toenhance patient engagement, as well as clinician adop-
tion and fidelity. The article highlights study procedures
and critical methodological decisions related to conduct-ing a hybrid E-I study for bCBT.
Methods
The Adjusting to Chronic Conditions Using Education,
Support, and Skills (ACCESS) study was developed to
examine the clinical effectiveness and implementationpotential of an evidence-based, patient-centered bCBT
intervention for depressed and/or anxious medically ill
veterans. The project is being conducted within the PC-MHI programs of two large VA medical centers in the
south central United States. The current study was
approved by the Baylor College of Medicine InstitutionalReview Board (H-27082) and local VA Research and De-
velopment review committee. As such the study is in
compliance with the Helsinki Declaration and all studyparticipants provided informed consent including per-
missions for publication of this report.
ACCESS uses a patient-level, randomized design and
focuses on veterans with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) and/or heart failure (HF). COPD and
HF are highly prevalent and burdensome to patients andthe healthcare system [37-39]. These conditions are exa-
cerbated by clinically elevated symptoms of depression
and anxiety, which are common in approximately 50%of this patient population [40-43].
ACCESS seeks to recruit 320 primary care patients
with COPD and/or HF and comorbid clinically elevatedsymptoms of depression and/or anxiety, identified
Clinical
Efficacy
ResearchClinical
Effectiveness
ResearchImplementation
ResearchImprovedProcess and
Outcomes
Hybrid Type 1
Primary: EffectivenessSecondary: Implementation 
Hybrid Type 2
Equal focus on effectiveness and
implementationHybrid Type 3
Primary: Implementation
Secondary: Effectiveness
Figure 1 Hybrid effectiveness –implementation designs as part of the clinical research continuum.Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 3 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
through VA databases and solicited using opt-out letters
(see Consort Diagram in Figure 2). Of these, 120
patients will be randomized to usual care (UC) and pro-vided with feedback about their depression and/or anx-
iety and encouraged to obtain services through their
primary care provider. The remaining 200 patients willbe randomized by blinded study staff to a bCBT inter-
vention ( e.g., ACCESS intervention) provided by front-
line mental health clinicians in two VA PC-MHI clinics.PC-MHI clinicians, who are mental health practitioners
from various disciplines, including psychology, social
work, nursing, and physician assistant backgrounds, willreceive a comprehensive set of implementation interven-
tions to enhance use and quality of the ACCESS inter-
vention within their ongoing clinical care clinics. Thecollective implementation strategy to be pilot tested was
created from the research team ’s past experience in
training clinicians in bCBT procedures and from theavailable implementation literature. The implementation
strategy includes the following interventional compo-
nents: (1) online clinician training; (2) audit and feed-back of clinician session content, as provided by expert
review; and (3) internal and external facilitation to sup-
port CBT use, including identification of system/clinicbarriers.
The study has two primary purposes: (1) to determine
the clinical effectiveness of the ACCESS intervention(bCBT) relative to UC on patient outcomes related to
symptoms of depression and anxiety and disease-specific
physical functioning and (2) to pilot test and examinethe acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary outcomes of
an implementation strategy designed to improve patient
engagement and adherence, as well as intervention qual-ity. Both effectiveness and implementation outcomes
(see Table 1 for study objectives) will be assessed, using
mixed methods involving qualitative procedures(e.g., focus interviews and surveys conducted with
patients and providers) and quantitative analyses
(e.g., intent-to-treat analyses and formal session fidelity
ratings).
Objective #1: clinical effectiveness of brief cognitive
behavioral therapy
Comparative effectiveness trials suggest a general
equivalence between CBT and other therapeutic modal-ities [44], with CBT being particularly well-suited for im-
plementation within primary care settings, given its
skill-based approach and ability to function with arestricted time and session framework [45,46]. Recent
evidence suggests the general efficacy of bCBT for
patients in primary care and patients with comorbidhealth conditions [17,18,47,48]. However, limited data
exist on the real-world effectiveness of bCBT within theprimary care setting, especially when used for the chron-
ically medically ill [49].
Clinical intervention
The ACCESS intervention is a manualized bCBT proto-
col that provides a flexible, patient-centered approach toincrease patient engagement and adherence, while
addressing both the mental and physical health needs of
veterans with COPD and HF. ACCESS consists of sixweekly treatment sessions and two brief (10- to 15-
minute) telephone “booster ”sessions within a four-
month time frame. Participants are asked to attend thefirst session in person and can participate in subsequent
sessions by telephone or in person.
The ACCESS intervention was developed based on
prior studies and input from a variety of stakeholders,
including patients, providers, PC-MHI directors, and na-
tional CBT experts [50]. Particular emphasis has beenplaced on maximizing intervention potency and minim-
izing session intensity and duration to maximize patient
engagement and adoption within PC-MHI settings.Patients initially receive core modules focused on in-
creasing awareness and controlling physical and emo-
tional symptoms and subsequently are able to selectskills from a series of module choices best aligned with
their most pressing needs. Therapists follow a structured
intervention manual, yet retain the ability to streamlineand tailor the bCBT intervention collaboratively with
patients when selecting treatment modules and goals. A
patient workbook is provided to structure session con-tent, guide telephone interactions, and provide oppor-
tunities to guide patient practice of skills between
sessions.
Following an iterative developmental process [19,50],
the ACCESS intervention was modified to be consistent
with the PC-MHI model of the VA of brief four to sixsessions of psychotherapy. ACCESS provides clinicians
with structure and details that seek to ensure high fidel-
ity to the intervention, while retaining flexibility in ad-ministration so as to mirror traditional psychotherapy
practices. Data from a previously conducted open trial
suggest that ACCESS improves both physical and emo-tional health outcomes and results in high engagement
and adherence [19]. Detailed descriptive information
about the content and processes of the ACCESS inter-vention can be found elsewhere [50].
Identification and recruitment of participants
Study participants are being recruited from the Houston
and Oklahoma City VA medical centers, using VA ad-
ministrative databases to identify COPD and HF patientswho received care in the prior year. Houston and Okla-
homa City VAs were chosen for their size and integra-
tion of primary care mental health within the VeteransCully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 4 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
Integrated Service Network 16. Opt-out letters are
mailed to participants to ensure the widest catchment
possible. Interested participants complete a telephone
screening process. Participants are included in the study
if they are confirmed to have patient-reported functional
limitations associated with their COPD and/or HF and
have clinically significant symptoms of anxiety and/or de-
pression. Participants are excluded only for clinical factors
(e.g., ongoing psychotherapy, concurrent specialty mental
healthcare) or patient factors ( e.g., cognitive, bipolar,
psychotic, or substance use disorders) that would render a
PC-MHI bCBT intervention or PC-MHI treatment setting
inappropriate [51]. Patients receiving psychotropic medi-
cations are not excluded, although they have their medica-
tion use monitored during the course of the study.
Sample size was established to ensure adequate power
to detect differences in the primary patient outcomes for
depression, anxiety, and physical health. To ensure 80%
power to detect differences at the 0.05 level for all study
measures, adjusting for repeated measures, a sample size
of 180 randomized patients was necessary. However, this
sample-size calculation was inflated because of the po-
tential for intraclass correlations related to the clustering
of patients within bCBT providers. Using an establishedinflation factor [52] and controlling for attrition of 25%,
the final sample-size calculation required 200 partici-
pants for the ACCESS arm and 120 for UC (320 total).
Unequal randomization, an accepted practice in clinical
trials [53], was used to reduce unnecessary recruitment
without significant impact on power. Randomization
was stratified by medical condition (COPD only, HF
only, both COPD and HF) and by site, using random
block sizes of 5 or 10. Because of the higher number of
patients in Houston, 200 of the 320 total patients will be
randomized at Houston and 120 at Oklahoma City. Ran-
dom allocation lists were generated using SAS statistical
software (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, NC, USA).
Randomization numbers are drawn from envelopes stuffed
by non-project staff and opened only after a participant is
deemed fully eligible and ready for group assignment.
Clinical effectiveness: outcome measures
Clinical effectiveness will be evaluated posttreatment (at
4 months) and at 8- and 12-month follow-ups by trained
independent evaluators not associated with other aspects
of the study. Assessment measures were selected to
evaluate both physical and emotional health constructs
related to COPD/HF patient-centered outcomes
Figure 2 Study CONSORT diagram illustrating flow of participant s from recruitment to random assignment to follow-up. ACCESS = Adjusting
to Chronic Conditions Using Education, Support, and Skills; COPD = chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HF = heart failure; MH = Mental Health;
SDP = Substance Dependence Program; CMHP = Comprehensive Mental Health Program; HBPC = Home Based Primary Care; TRP = Trauma
Recovery Program; PCP = primary care physician; NYHA = New York Heart Association; MRC = Medical Research Council Breathlessness Scale;
BAI = Beck Anxiety Inventory; PHQ-9 = Patient Health Questionnaire-9.Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 5 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
(Chronic Respiratory Questionnaire [54], Kansas City
Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire [55]), anxiety [56], and
depression (Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9)
[57]). These effectiveness measures have strong psycho-metric properties and possess a high degree of external
validity for clinical use in the primary care setting. For
example, within the VA, the PHQ-9 is the standardmeasure for depression screening and intervention out-
come evaluation [58]. Other study variables include
demographic variables, COPD/HF severity, presence/ab-sence of coexistent psychiatric and medical conditions,
psychotropic medication use, and health-services use, in-
cluding ambulatory and inpatient care, primary care, andspecialty care. Treatment intensity ( “dose ”) will be mea-
sured by total number of bCBT sessions.
In addition to the above quantitative measures,
semistructured-interview data are being collected from
patients and providers regarding the impact of the inter-
vention on physical and emotional health and identifica-tion of salient aspects of the treatment. Interviews will
be conducted with all enrolled clinicians and a purpose-
ful sample of 5 to 10 patients identified during the laterstages of the trial. Patients are selected based on
ACCESS clinician recommendations. Clinicians also
refer ACCESS patients who recently completed treat-ment and might be able to share additional information
about the intervention (whether positive or negative and
regardless of treatment engagement).
Clinical effectiveness: analyses
All quantitative analyses will be done on an intention-to-treat basis, and participants will be analyzed in the groupto which they were randomized. Absolute differences in
outcome measures will be examined between baseline and
12-month follow-up, and the effect sizes of the bCBTgroup will be compared with those of participants in the
UC group. We will also examine effect sizes for the bCBT
group baseline versus posttreatment and eight-monthfollow-up. To compare changes between the two groups
over time, we will use longitudinal, mixed-model analyses
that allow nesting of patients by medical center site.
Qualitative data will be collected using audiotaped inter-
actions of the semistructured interview, transcribed and
coded for themes, in combination with interviewer (field)notes. Using content-analysis methods, we will code text-
ual data from the patients ’and providers ’perspectives to
uncover patterns in the experiences of the bCBT interven-tion [59-62]. Coding and analysis will be conducted using
formal qualitative-research methods. It is anticipated that
qualitative data will provide details about the meaning ofthe intervention and its context within primary care that
are unattainable using survey methods.
Objective #2: implementation strategy and evaluation of
adoption and implementation
Objective #2 seeks to pilot test and evaluate the accept-
ability, feasibility and preliminary outcomes of a compre-
hensive implementation strategy designed to increase
bCBT engagement, adherence, and quality. The develop-ment and administration of these procedures are viewed
as important to understanding the barriers and facilitators
associated with access, adoption, and fidelity of bCBT.Given the developmental nature of this work, a case-study
design was used without a clinician control group.
Partnership development and implementation framework
Implementation planning for this study began with the
construction of multiple stakeholder partnerships withinthe VA PC-MHI program. Study investigators with
knowledge and prior practice experience in PC-MHI ac-
tively worked with PC-MHI clinicians and directors atboth intervention sites to examine interests and needs
related to evidence-based bCBT practices. The project
team worked with these frontline stakeholders to iden-tify needs and practice barriers to help inform the
current project.
The ACCESS implementation strategy was informed
by the Promoting Action on Research Implementation
in Health Services (PARiHS) framework [63,64]. Accord-
ing to PARiHS, successful implementation (SI) is afunction (f) of Evidence (E), Context (C), and Facilitation
(F). Evidence refers to sources of knowledge and the
importance of this knowledge as perceived by stake-holders. Context encompasses the environment or set-
ting in which the improvement program is implemented.
Facilitation refers to a technique by which an individualTable 1 Study outcomes and objectives
Outcome Objective
Effectiveness #1: To determine whether a bCBT treatment
group as provided by VA PC-MHI clinicians issuperior to a usual-care control group at post
treatment and 8- and 12-month follow-ups, as
measured by:
a) depression and anxiety scores
(Patient Health Questionnaire-9and Beck Anxiety Inventory)
b) cardiopulmonary disease
outcomes (Chronic RespiratoryQuestionnaire and Kansas CityCardiomyopathy Questionnaire).
Implementation #2: To assess bCBT adoption and
fidelity, as measured by:
a) bCBT patient engagement (one or
more sessions) and adherence (four ormore sessions)
b) PC-MHI clinician bCBT adherence
and competency ratings as evaluated
by expert audio session reviews.
bCBT brief cognitive behavioral therapy, VADepartment of Veterans Affairs,
PC-MHI Primary Care-Mental Health Integration.Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 6 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
or group makes adoption or implementation easier for
others, achieved through support in terms of attitudes,
habits, skills, and ways of thinking and working.
Implementation strategy
Based on stakeholder feedback and project-team experi-ences, the implementation strategy for this trial was
developed to include three separate but interrelated
interventions —online clinician training, clinician audit
and feedback, and internal and external facilitation. Each
element was developed within the PARiHS model and
augmented by the available implementation literature.The project team focused on competing demands for de-
pression treatment in the primary care setting —namely,
constructs related to patients, providers, and the largerprimary care clinical setting [65]. To address these three
areas in accordance with the PARiHS framework, the
implementation strategy included (1) online cliniciantraining to address confidence and competency, as well
as potential patient barriers related to presenting con-
cerns, attitudes about mental health treatment, andinitial goal-setting strategies to increase treatment en-
gagement [45,66]; (2) audit and feedback of clinician ses-
sion content, as provided by expert review [26,67] (auditand feedback was viewed as a critical element to not
only assess treatment fidelity but also to assist clinicians
by providing timely feedback about performance bothpositive and negative); and (3) internal and external fa-
cilitation to support CBT use, including identification of
system/clinic barriers [46]. Facilitation that represents apackage of well-known change strategies employed by
the facilitator to address individual or site-specific issues
at the right time to promote change adoption [46] wasseen as the primary implementation intervention to ad-
dress barriers at the system level, including difficulties
with patient scheduling and provider time allowances fortherapy.
In addition to these elements, ACCESS engages the par-
ticipation of an advisory council consisting of various sta-keholders from PC-MHI programs, as well as regional
and national mental health leaders within the VA. Given
the pilot nature of this implementation strategy, particularemphasis has been placed on understanding stakeholder
perspectives, using formative (pre-implementation) and
process (during implementation) evaluations such that theimplementation interventions could be modified as
needed during the trial.
ACCESS clinicians
The study has targeted the inclusion of 12 PC-MHI
clinicians between the two sites. The project team isworking collaboratively with local stakeholders and clinic
directors to identify clinicians best suited to provide psy-
chotherapy services. Clinician enrollment is notinfluenced by prior psychotherapy or CBT knowledge
and skill. However, clinicians are expected to have an
interest in using bCBT in their daily practice and areasked to voluntarily participate and formally consent to
participate. Nurses, social workers, psychologists, coun-
selors, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants willpotentially be included in the trial. Pretrial data will be
collected for all study providers to help identify unequal
entry-level bCBT expertise in care providers. Follow-upfidelity data will be collected throughout the project to
document provider skill and intervention adherence.
Implementation intervention #1: ACCESS (bCBT) online
clinician training
All study therapists participate in a comprehensive bCBT
training program based on methods developed in a prior
study [45]. Print-based intervention materials ( e.g.,c l i n -
ician manual and patient workbook) provide a founda-
tional knowledge of the intervention [50]. Print-based
materials are augmented by an online training course(www.vaprojectaccess.org) consisting of narrated audio
slides and audio vignettes to elaborate on critical interven-
tion elements (detailed in a separate article —Cully et al.
[66]).
Implementation intervention #2: audit and feedback
Following the introductory training, clinicians receiveaudit and feedback on their first ACCESS therapy patient.Clinicians audiotape each session and have those audio-
tapes reviewed by a bCBT expert for adherence and skill-
fulness, using a standard rating scale [19,26,68]. Feedbackfrom these evaluations is provided to the clinician after
session 2 (completion of the core modules) and again at
the conclusion of treatment. After completion of the firstpatient, clinicians continue to audiotape sessions, with
audit and feedback occurring for a random selection and
feedback on no less than two sessions every four months.While clinicians are not required to maintain minimal
levels of adherence or skillfulness to remain in the trial
(thus allowing for the evaluation of the intervention underreal-world circumstances), those with scores falling below
anap r i o r i minimum performance standard are provided
with increased frequency of audit and feedback.
Implementation intervention #3: internal and external
facilitation
External facilitation is provided to both intervention
sites by bCBT experts/trainers as pilot tested by Kauth
et al. [46]. The exact nature and content of external fa-
cilitation varies between sites, depending on clinicianneeds and logistical constraints. In general, external
facilitators engage clinicians in regular individual or
group meetings and less formally through telephone andCully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 7 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
email communication. The purpose of external facilita-
tion is to provide clinicians with opportunities to address
questions or concerns about the intervention, dissemin-ate key information related to implementation, and cre-
ate a sense of colleageality and community among the
clinicians [69]. Although external facilitators will addresstopics related to ACCESS intervention procedures and
strategies, they focus on assisting clinicians to adopt and
maintain fidelity of bCBT in their daily practice [46].
Internal facilitation efforts, although not a robust im-
plementation strategy for this study, consist of engaging
PC-MHI directors to facilitate the adoption of bCBTwithin each site ’s PC-MHI clinic. Study external facilita-
tors work with PC-MHI directors (internal facilitators)
to share information related to the project and encour-age the directors to provide resources to clinicians to fa-
cilitate training and use of bCBT. External facilitators
and study personnel also engage internal facilitators atboth sites to streamline clinical processes and increase
adoption, as dictated by the unique needs at each site.
Study advisory council
A team of researchers and “end users, ”including VA
clinical managers and regional and national VA mental
health leaders, have agreed to participate as study advi-sors to monitor progress and provide feedback on adop-
tion and implementation of the bCBT intervention. The
advisory council will meet semiannually throughout thestudy. During these meetings, the advisory council will
receive updates on study progress, and notable occur-
rences will be discussed. The primary purpose of thesemeetings is to identify and address challenges and effect-
ive practice patterns to improve adoption of bCBT in
other primary care settings within the VA. The advisorycouncil also serves as an advocate for change and as a
conduit for dissemination of study findings.
Implementation evaluation plan and analyses
Engagement and adherence will be measured for all parti-cipants randomized into bCBT. Patient engagement is
defined as the percentage of randomized patients that at-tend at least one CBT session. Adherence is defined as the
completion of four or more active-treatment sessions. We
will compare the percentage of patients with engagementand adherence by bCBT clinician and site and subse-
quently examine overall rates to those found in similar
brief therapy trials [47]. The study advisory committee willreview these outcomes and make recommendations as to
the“clinical significance ”of these findings relative to VA
policy and current initiatives in PC-MHI.
We will also use clinician survey data to examine im-
plementation success according to principles contained
in the PARiHS framework, as detailed by Stetler et al. ,2011 [64]. Survey data will elicit provider Likert-style
responses to domains related to consistency of ACCESS
procedures with available evi dence-based mental health
treatments (PARiHS evidence) and suitability of ACCESS
for PC-MHI (PARiHS context), as well as detailed ques-
tions eliciting feedback and perceptions of the various im-plementation interventions (PARiHS facilitation). Although
not the focus of the study, amount of time spent conduct-
ing the implementation interventions will be collected.
Qualitative methods (individual interviews) with bCBT
stakeholders (patients, clinicians, and clinic directors and
managers) will be used to elicit information on percep-tions of bCBT importance, potential for adoption, and po-
tential barriers to implementation. Individual interviews
will be conducted using a semistructured interview formatand conducted by an experienced psychotherapist. The
semistructured interview format will allow for flexibility to
explore each individual stakeholder ’s perspectives. These
data, which are not attainable through traditional survey
methods, will provide another level of data on acceptabil-
ity, feasibility, and impact of the implementation interven-tions to help determine the potential for wider use of the
implementation strategy in future trials.
Finally, taking advantage of the longer-term posttreat-
ment patient follow-up period, we will examine clinician
bCBT utilization rates six months postcompletion of all
study implementation efforts. Using a self-report survey,we will measure frequency of bCBT procedures and
techniques used by clinicians to document perceived
practice changes during and after implementation.
Discussion
Hybrid E-I designs have the potential to rapidly advancethe utilization of evidence-based practices for complex
mental health treatments such as bCBT. However, impact
of these designs is strongly tied to the project team ’s ability
to form meaningful partnerships with stakeholders, includ-
ing patients, clinicians, administrators, and policy makers.
Effective partnerships are more likely to translate into a col-
laborative team-based approach and a shared vision. From
this shared vision, the team can more effectively address
the logistical and methodologi cal challenges associated with
administering interventions and changing practice patterns.
Although the “upfront cost ”of building these partnerships
is significant, these collaborat ions are more likely to gener-
ate high-quality treatments that are feasible for frontline
practice settings and may avoi d common pitfalls associated
with post hoc adaptations to efficacy-based interventions,
especially the threat to validity that commonly occurs when
translating evidence to pra ctice [70]. Although hybrid
designs may aid in mitigating the current science-to-servicegaps [28], the application of these designs requires thought-
ful planning and potentially difficult methodological
compromises.Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 8 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
The ACCESS project began with grant preparations that
engaged local, regional, and national stakeholders. Stake-
holders unanimously agreed that bCBT interventions wereneeded for the PC-MHI setting and that clinicians would
benefit from having additional resources to learn and
apply these treatments. Given this shared vision, the pro-ject team worked actively with stakeholders to create a
clinical intervention and implementation strategy that was
viewed as feasible and meaningful. The project team wasthen able to focus on addressing the methodological chal-
lenges of blending a study with both effectiveness and im-
plementation goals. For the ACCESS project, the teamthought it critical to test a set of clinical and implementa-
tion interventions that would provide data applicable for
the scientific, clinical, administrative, and policy commu-nities. At its core, the ACCESS project seeks to provide
knowledge that will lead to improvements in the provision
of mental healthcare for the primary care setting.
The following sections provide examples of the import-
ant methodological compromises identified and addressed
in the current study, focusing on the balance between in-ternal validity and improvement of care processes. Con-
sistent with other hybrid studies, ACCESS requires a
longer-term study period (four years) and considerable fi-nancial and human capital resources. The trial also targets
a large number of study participants (N = 320), which
allows greater statistical power to examine mediators andmoderators to balance the need for effectiveness and im-
plementation outcomes simultaneously.
Methodological challenge #1: patient identification,
recruitment, and inclusion criteria
Traditional efficacy designs are conducted with strict
internal controls and rigorous patient inclusion and
exclusion criteria, often at the expense of restricting
applicability to clinical practice. The current trial usesrelaxed inclusion and exclusion criteria to more closely
align study participants with typical patients seen by PC-
MHI clinicians in their daily practice. The study also usessymptom (rather than diagnostic) assessment tools com-
monly used in PC-MHI.
Patient evaluations are conducted by independent evalua-
tors and allow separation of the clinical and evaluation
components of the trial. Most importantly, these evalua-
tions serve as a method for obtaining detailed clinical infor-mation about patients, which c an be used during secondary
mediator and moderator analyses without posing unneces-
sary restrictions on partic ipant inclusion criteria.
Methodological challenge #2: clinical intervention and
interventionists
Clinical interventions must possess replicable procedures
but also have high levels of external validity and be feasible
within the predetermined practice environment. Theclinical intervention for the current trial was developed as
a brief technique to closely align with PC-MHI care mod-
els. To increase flexibility and acceptability, the clinicalintervention includes options for telephone sessions and
allows clinicians and patients to select modules (content)
to best address the patient ’s individual needs. Although
intervention flexibility is viewed as congruent with real-
world practice, it also creates variation in the content and
delivery. To retain these core treatment aspects whileretaining moderate internal controls, the project uses
comprehensive data-collection strategies, such as medical-
record reviews and fidelity ratings of session content, todescribe and statistically account for variability in treat-
ment delivery in secondary analyses.
Methodological challenge #3: implementation strategy
and modification of clinic procedures
The immediate aim of the implementation strategy is to
provide PC-MHI clinicians and clinics with the neces-
sary support to conduct bCBT. In the current trial, a
developmental implementation strategy is being pilottested for acceptability, feasibility, and preliminary
outcomes. Unlike the clinical intervention, which will
remain unchanged throughout the study, the implemen-tation interventions are conceptualized as developmen-
tal, given the potential for variability in practice patterns
and needs within the two PC-MHI sites. In developingthe implementation interventions, the project team
(including stakeholders) targeted learning opportunities
that could be feasibly embedded within the existing PC-MHI structure. We also sought to create objective pro-
cedures to be tested and refined for future use in a more
comprehensive implementation trial. Lastly, the evalu-ation team intends to rely heavily on stakeholders and
the advisory council to direct implementation efforts. As
such, stakeholders will receive regular implementationupdates, and we will elicit feedback from these groups to
identify needed changes. The long-term implementation
aim is to better understand the impact of a refined im-plementation strategy using a cluster randomized design.
Ultimately, this work seeks to aid in the identification of
best-practice guidelines for psychotherapy use in the pri-mary care setting.
Opportunities for knowledge transfer and dissemination
of project results
Transfer of information, including research findings,
training, and clinical-care practices from this study, willbe ongoing and multifaceted. The dual approach of the
hybrid type 2 design will allow the project to meaning-
fully target frontline practitioners and managers, na-tional scientific research journals and professional
organizations, as well as national, regional, and local VA
and other academic hospital leaders and policy makers.Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 9 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
The project team intends to disseminate published
training and intervention materials to frontline practi-
tioners both within and outside the VA through theestablished ACCESS website (www.vaprojectaccess.org),
as well as through focused dissemination channels
within the VA, including regional and national distribu-tions through the VA Veteran Integrated Service Net-
works and Central Office administration and leadership.
The advisory council will assist in dissemination of studyfindings, both within and beyond the VA.
Preliminary data from the trial will focus on imple-
mentation and training process characteristics, the con-tinued advancement of partnerships, and baseline
clinical information on patient functioning. Final study
data will address the study objectives related to clinicaleffectiveness of bCBT and the utility and success of the
piloted implementation strategy to enhance bCBT adop-
tion. Dissemination of these project findings will notonly target traditional scientific publication avenues and
national presentations but will also seek to inform clin-
ical leaders at the national, regional, and local levels ofthe VA.
Although hybrid E-I designs are often complicated by
methodological trade-offs, the opportunities for scientificand clinical practice advancements are significant. In the
current trial, the dual focus on bCBT effectiveness and
developmental implementation strategies will afford theproject team a unique opportunity to simultaneously
understand patient outcomes and clinical practices chal-
lenges. Further, given the structure of the researchdesign, the project is likely to provide meaningful imple-
mentation data and scientific findings, regardless of the
patient clinical outcomes. The implementation approach,constructed with active involvement of multiple stake-
holders and end users, was broadly constructed around
increasing the utilization of evidence-based psychothera-pies within primary care. As such, the formative aspect
of the implementation strategy will generate data that
are distinct from the patient clinical-effectiveness aspectsof the study and may inform future, more rigorous
implementation studies.
Summary
Corresponding to its desire to expand access to
evidence-based mental health treatments for veterans,
the VA is ideally situated and currently needs identifica-
tion of feasible evidence-based treatments for use withinthe primary care setting. Hybrid designs like the one
described in this study have the potential to rapidly ad-
vance the knowledge of both the clinical effectiveness ofbCBT and the possible implementation of best practices
necessary to support the use of this complex interven-
tion in real-world care.Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
JAC is the principal investigator and contributed to study conception anddesign and manuscript preparation. MEAA, JM, and MRN helped with the
design and acquisition of data related to clinician training and facilitation
and contributed to manuscript preparation. ADN is a co-investigator, actedas a medical consultant, and contributed to study conception and designand manuscript preparation. MAS is a co-investigator and contributed to
study conception and design, fidelity measurement, and manuscript
preparation. KHS is a co-investigator and Oklahoma City site principalinvestigator and contributed to study conception and design, cliniciantraining and facilitation in Oklahoma City, and manuscript preparation. MEK
is a co-investigator and contributed to study conception and design and
manuscript preparation. NJP is a co-investigator and contributed to statisticalanalyses, study conception and design, and manuscript preparation. MRK is aco-investigator and contributed to study conception and design and
manuscript preparation. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Sonora Hudson for her assistance in
preparation of this manuscript. We would also like to thank our clinical
partners, including Candy Smith, Pamela Fischer, and all of the mental healthpractitioners at the PC-MHI study sites.This material is based upon work supported by the Department of Veterans
Affairs (HSR&D Grant IIR 09-088). It was also partly supported by the Veterans
Health Administration, Office of Research and Development and theHouston VA Health Services Research and Development Center of Excellence(HFP90-020) and the South Central Mental Illness, Research, Education, and
Clinical Center. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors
and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of the Department ofVeterans Affairs, the US government, or Baylor College of Medicine.
Author details
1Houston VA HSR&D Center of Excellence, Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center,
Houston, TX, USA.2VA South Central Mental Illness Research, Education and
Clinical Center (a virtual center), USA.3Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.4Department of
Medicine/Health Services Research, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
5Oklahoma Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.6Department
of Geriatrics, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK,
USA.
Received: 10 April 2012 Accepted: 20 June 2012
Published: 11 July 2012
References
1. Clark DM, Salkovskis PM, Hackmann A, Middleton H, Anastasiades P, Gelder
M:A comparison of cognitive therapy, applied relaxation and
imipramine in the treatment of panic disorder. Br J Psychiatry 1994,
164:759 –769.
2. Gloaguen V, Cottraux J, Cucherat M, Blackburn IM: A meta-analysis of the
effects of cognitive therapy in depressed patients. J Affect Disord 1998,
49:59–72.
3. Stanley MA, Beck JG, Novy DM, Averill PM, Swann AC, Diefenbach GJ, et al:
Cognitive-behavioral treatment of late-life generalized anxiety disorder.J Consult Clin Psychol 2003, 71:309 –319. Retrieved from PM:12699025.
4. Wenzel A, Brown GK, Karlin BE: Cognitive behavioral therapy for depression in
veterans and military service members: therapist manual . Washington, D.C.: U.
S. Department of Veterans Affairs; 2011.
5. Whitfield G, Williams C: The evidence base for cognitive-behavioural
therapy in depression: delivery in busy clinical settings. Adv Psychiatr
Treat 2003, 9:21–30. doi:10.1192/apt.9.1.21. Retrieved from http://apt.rcpsych.
org/content/9/1/21.abstract.
6. Cuijpers P, van Straten A, van Schaik A, Andersson G: Psychological
treatment of depression in primary care: a meta-analysis. B J Gen Pract
2009, 59:e51 –e60.
7. Wolf NJ, Hopko DR: Psychosocial and pharmacological interventions for
depressed adults in primary care: A critical review. Clin Psychol Rev 2008,Cully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 10 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
28:131 –161. doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2007.04.004. Retrieved from http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272735807000785.
8. Cully J, Tolpin L, Jimenez D, Kunik M, Petersen L: Psychotherapy in the
Veterans Health Administration: missed opportunities? Psychol Serv 2008,
55:320 –331.
9. Glasgow RE, Lichtenstein E, Marcus AC: Why don't we see more translation
of health promotion research to practice? Rethinking the efficacy-to-
effectiveness transition. Am J Public Health 2003, 93:1261 –1267.
10. Alexander CL, Arnkoff DB, Glass CR: Bringing psychotherapy to primary
care: innovations and challenges. Clin Psychol 2010, 17:191 –214.
doi:10.1111/j.1468-2850.2010.01211.x. Retrieved from http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2850.2010.01211.x.
11. Funderburk JS, Sugarman DE, Labbe AK, Rodrigues A, Maisto SA, Nelson B:
Behavioral health interventions being implemented in a VA primary care
system. J Clin Psychol Med Settings 2011, 18:22–29. doi:10.1007/s10880-011-
9230-y. Retrieved from http://www.springerlink.com/index/10.1007/s10880-011-9230-y.
12. Veterans Health Administration: Uniform mental health services in VA medical
centers and clinics (VHA Handbook 1160.01) . Washington, DC: Department of
Veterans Affairs; 2008.
13. Karlin BE, Ruzek JI, Chard KM, Eftekhari A, Monson CM, Hembree EA, Resick
PA, Foa EB: Dissemination of evidence-based psychological treatments
for posttraumatic stress disorder in the Veterans Health Administration.J Trauma Stress 2010, 23:663 –673. doi:10.1002/jts.20588. Retrieved from
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jts.20588.
14. McHugh RK, Barlow DH: The dissemination and implementation of
evidence-based psychological treatments. A review of current efforts.Am Psychol 2010, 65:73–84.
15. Unützer J, Katon W, Sullivan M, Miranda J: Treating depressed older adults
in primary care: narrowing the gap between efficacy and effectiveness.
Milbank Q 1999, 77:225 –256.
16. Bower P, Gilbody S: Managing common mental health disorders in
primary care: conceptual models and evidence base. BMJ 2005, 330
(7495):839 –842.
17. Nieuwsma JA, Trivedi RB, McDuffie J, Kronish I, Benjamin D, Williams JW:
Brief psychotherapy for depression in primary care: a systematic review of the
evidence (VA-ESP Project #09-010) . Washington, DC: Department of Veterans
Affairs, Veterans Health Administration; 2011.
18. Cape J, Whittington C, Buszewicz M, Wallace P, Underwood L: Brief
psychological therapies for anxiety and depression in primary care:meta-analysis and meta-regression. BMC Med 2010, 8:38.
19. Cully JA, Stanley MA, Deswal A, Hanania NA, Phillips LL, Kunik ME:
Cognitive-behavioral therapy for chronic cardiopulmonary conditions:
Moving beyond mental health outcomes. Prim Care Companion J Clin
Psychiatry 2010, 12(4):e1 –e6.
20. Bartels SJ, Coakley EH, Zubritsky C, Ware JH, Miles KM, Areán PA, Chen H,
Oslin DW, Llorente MD, Costantino G, Quijano L, McIntyre JS, Linkins KW,Oxman TE, Maxwell J, Levkoff SE, PRISM-E Investigators: Improving access
to geriatric mental health services: a randomized trial comparing
treatment engagement with integrated versus enhanced referral carefor depression, anxiety, and at-risk alcohol use. Am J Psychiatry 2004,
161:1455 –1462.
21. Lester H, Tritter JQ, Sorohan H: Patients' and health professionals' views
on primary care for people with serious mental illness: focus group
study. BMJ 2005, 330:1122.
22. Robinson P, Reiter J: Behavioral consultation and primary care: a guide to
integrating services . New York: Springer; 2007.
23. Robinson P: Adapting empirically supported treatments to the primary
care setting: a template for success .I nBehavioral Integrative Care:
Treatments That Work in the Primary Care Setting . Edited by O'Donahue W,
Byrd M, Cummings N, Henderson D. New York: Brunner-Routledge;2005:53 –71.
24. Roy-Byrne P, Craske MG, Sullivan G, Rose RD, Edlund MJ, Lang AJ, Bystritsky
A, Welch SS, Chavira DA, Golinelli D, Campbell Sills L, Sherbourne Cd, Stein
MB:Delivery of evidence-based treatment for multiple anxiety disorders
in primary care. JAMA 2010, 303:1921 –1928. doi:10.1001/jama.2010.608.
Retrieved from http://jama.ama-assn.org/content/303/19/1921.abstract.
25. Roy-Byrne PP, Craske MG, Stein MB, Sullivan G, Bystritsky A, Katon W,
Golinelli D, Sherbourne CD: A randomized effectiveness trial of cognitive-
behavioral therapy and medication for primary care panic disorder. ArchGen Psychiatry 2005, 62:290 –298. Retrieved from http://archpsyc.ama-assn.
org/cgi/content/abstract/62/3/290.
26. Stanley MA, Wilson NL, Novy DM, Rhoades HM, Wagener PD, Greisinger AJ,
Cully JA, Kunik ME: Cognitive behavior therapy for generalized anxiety
disorder among older adults in primary care. JAMA 2009, 301:1460 –1467.
Retrieved from http://jama.ama-assn.org/content/301/14/1460.abstract.
27. Willemse GRWM, Smit F, Cuijpers P, Tiemens BG: Minimal-contact
psychotherapy for sub-threshold depression in primary care. Br J
Psychiatry 2004, 185:416 –421. Retrieved from http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/
185/5/416.abstract.
28. Institute of Medicine: Crossing the quality chasm: a new health system for the
21st century . Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press; 2001.
29. Flay BR: Efficacy and effectiveness trials (and other phases of research) in the
development of health promotion programs. Prev Med 1986, 15:451 –474.
30. Wells KB: Treatment research at the crossroads: the scientific interface of
clinical trials and effectiveness research.
Am J Psychiatry 1999, 156:5–10.
31. Curran GM, Bauer M, Mittman B, Pyne JM, Stetler C: Effectiveness-
implementation hybrid designs: combining elements of clinical
effectiveness and implementation research to enhance public healthImpact. Med Care 2012, 50:217 –226.
32. Farris RP, Will JC, Khaviou O, Finkelstein EA: Beyond effectiveness:
evaluating the public health impact of the WISEWOMAN program.
Am J Public Health 2007, 97(4):641 –647.
33. Glasgow RE, Vogt TM, Boles SM: Evaluating the public health impact of
health promotion interventions: the RE-AIM framework. Am J Public
Health 1999, 89:1322 –1327.
34. Glasgow RE, McKay HG, Piette JD, Reynolds KD: The RE-AIM framework for
evaluating interventions: what can it tell us about approaches to chronic
illness management? Patient Educ Couns 2001, 44:119 –127. Retrieved from
PM:11479052.
35. Hallfors D, Cho H: Moving behavioral science from efficacy to
effectiveness. Int J Behav Consult Ther 2007, 3:236 –250.
36. Jenkinson KA, Naughton G, Benson AC: The GLAMA (Girls! Lead! Achieve!
Mentor! Activate!) physical activity and peer leadership intervention pilotproject: a process evaluation using the Re-AIM framework. BMC Publ
Health 2012, 12:55.
37. Jemal A, Ward E, Hao Y, Thun M: Trends in the leading causes of death in
the United States, 1970-2002. JAMA 2005, 294:1255 –1259.
38. O ’Connell JB: The economic burden of heart failure. Clin Cardiol 2000, 23
(3Suppl):III6 –III10.
39. World Health Organization: Chronic Respiratory Disease. Burden of COPD .;
2012. Available at http://www.who.int/respiratory/copd/burden/en/index.
html. Accessed 4/9/12.
40. Cully JA, Graham DP, Stanley MA, Ferguson CJ, Sharafkhaneh A, Souchek J,
Kunik ME: Quality of life in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease and comorbid anxiety or depression. Psychosomatics 2006,
47:312 –319.
41. Cully J, Jimenez D, LeDoux T, Deswal A: Recognition and treatment of
depression and anxiety symptoms in heart failure. Prim Care Companion J
Clin Psychiatry 2009, 11:103 –109.
42. Kunik ME, Roundy K, Veazey C, Souchek J, Richardson P, Wray NP, Stanley
MA:Surprisingly high prevalence of anxiety and depression in chronic
breathing disorders. Chest 2005, 127:1205 –1211.
43. Cully JA, Johnson M, Moffett M, Khan M, Deswal A: Depression and anxiety in
ambulatory patients with heart failure. Psychosomatics 2009, 50:592 –598.
44. DeRubeis RJ, Crits-Christoph P: Empirically supported individual and
group psychological treatments for adult mental disorders. J Consult Clin
Psychol 1998, 66:37–52.
45. Cully JA, Teten AT, Benge J, Sorocco K, Kauth M: Multidisciplinary cognitive
behavioral therapy training for the VA primary care setting. Prim Care
Companion J Clin Psychiatry 2010, 12(3): e1–e8.
46. Kauth MR, Sullivan G, Blevins D, Cully JA, Landes RD, Said Q, Teasdale TA:
Employing external facilitation to implement cognitive behavioral
therapy in VA clinics: a pilot study. Implement Sci 2010, 5:75.
47. Kunik ME, Veazey C, Cully JA, Souchek J, Graham DP, Hopko D, Carter R,
Sharafkhaneh A, Goepfert EJ, Wray N, Stanley MA: COPD education and
cognitive behavioral therapy group treatment for clinically significant
symptoms of depression and anxiety in COPD patients: a randomized
controlled trial. Psychol Med 2008, 38:385 –396.
48. Lustman PJ, Griffith LS, Freedland KE, Kissel SS, Clouse RE: Cognitive
behavior therapy for depression in type 2 diabetes mellitus. ACully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 11 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1998, 129:613 –621.
49. Mignogna JM, Cully JA: Depression and anxiety in patients with COPD: a
focus on psychological treatments in ambulatory care settings. Curr
Respir Med Rev 2012, 8:137 –144.
50. Cully JA, Paukert A, Falco J, Stanley MA: Cognitive-behavioral therapy:
innovations for cardiopulmonary patients with depression and anxiety.
Cogn Behav Pract 2009, 16:394 –407.
51. Sheehan DV, Lecrubier Y, Sheehan KH, Janavs J, Weiller E: Comparison of
the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) with the SCID-P
and the CIDI: a validity study. Psychopharmacol Bull 1995, 31:616.
52. Schnurr PP, Friedman MJ, Engel CC, Foa EB, Shea MT, Resick PM, James KE,
Chow BK: Issues in the design of multisite clinical trials of psychotherapy:
VA Cooperative Study No. 494 as an example. Contemp Clin Trials 2005,
26:626 –636.
53. Dumville JC, Hahn S, Miles JNV, Torgerson DJ: The use of unequal
randomization ratios in clinical trials: a review. Contemp Clin Trials 2007,
27:1–12.
54. Guyatt GH, Berman LB, Townsend M, Pugsley SO, Chambers LW: A measure
of quality of life for clinical trials in chronic lung disease. Thorax 1987,
42:773 –778.
55. Green CP, Porter CB, Bresnahan DR, Spertus JA: Development and evaluation
of the Kansas City Cardiomyopathy Questionnaire: a new health status
measure for heart failure. JA mC o l lC a r d i o l 2000, 35:1245 –1255.
56. Beck AT, Steer RA: Beck anxiety inventory: manual . San Antonio: Harcourt
Assessment, Inc.; 1990.
57. Spitzer RL, Kroenke K, Williams JB: Validation and utility of a self-report
version of PRIME-MD: the PHW primary care study. Primary Care
Evaluation of Mental Disorders. Patient Health Questionnaire. JAMA 1999,
282:1734 –1744.
58. Oslin DW, Ross J, Sayers S, Murphy J, Kane V, Katz IR: Screening, assessment
and management of depression in VA primary care clinics. J Gen Intern
Med 2006, 21:46–50.
59. Patton MQ: Qualitative evaluation and research methods . 3rd edition.
Thousand Oaks: Sage; 2002.
60. Lincoln YS, Guba G: Naturalistic inquiry . Beverly Hills: Sage; 1985.
61. Gubrium JF, Holstein JA: Handbook of interview research . Thousand Oaks:
Sage; 2002.
62. Miles MB, Huberman AM: Qualitative data analysis . 2nd edition. Thousand
Oaks: Sage; 1994.
63. Kitson A, Rycroft-Maline J, Harvey G, McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A:
Evaluating the successful implementation of evidence into practice
using the PARIHS framework: theoretical and practical challenges.
Implement Sci 2008, 3(1):1.
64. Stetler CB, Damschroder LJ, Helfrich CE, Hagedorn HJ: A guide for applying
a revised version of the PARIHS framework for implementation.
Implement Sci 2011, 6:99.
65. Klinkman MS: Competing demands in psychosocial care: a model for the
identification and treatment of depressive disorders in primary care. Gen
Hosp Psychiatry 1997, 19:98–111.
66. Cully JA, Curry AD, Ryan SR, Malik A, Zeno D, Willcockson I: Develoment of
a computer-aided training program for brief cognitive-behavioral
therapy in primary care. Acad Psychiatry 2011, in press.
67. Jamtvedt G, Young JM, Kristoffersen DT, O ’Brien MA, Oxman AD: Audit and
feedback: effects on professional practice and health care outcomes.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006, (2):CD000259.
68. Cully JA, Mignogna J, Stanley MA, Davila J, Wear J, Amico KR, Giordano TP:
Development and pilot testing of a standardized training program for a
patient-mentoring intervention to increase adherence to outpatient HIV
care. AIDS Patient Care STDS 2012, 26(3):165 –172.
69. Kauth M, Sullivan G, Cully JA, Blevins D: Facilitating mental health practice
changes: a practical guide for developing implementation plans. Prof
Psychol Res Pr 2011, 8:36–47.
70. Naik AD, Isaac TT, Street RL Jr, Kunik ME: Understanding the quality chasm for
hypertension control in diabetes: a structured review of “comaneuvers ”
used in clinical trials. JA mB o a r dF a mM e d 2007, 20:469 –478.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-64
Cite this article as: Cully et al. :Brief cognitive behavioral therapy in
primary care: a hybrid type 2 patient-randomized
effectiveness-implementation design. Implementation Science 2012 7:64.Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitCully et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:64 Page 12 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/64
