RESEARCH Open Access
Implementation of the CALM intervention for
anxiety disorders: a qualitative study
Geoffrey M Curran1,2*, Greer Sullivan1,3, Peter Mendel4, Michelle G Craske5, Cathy D Sherbourne4, Murray B Stein6,
Ashley McDaniel3and Peter Roy-Byrne7,8
Abstract
Background: Investigators recently tested the effectiveness of a collaborative-care intervention for anxiety
disorders: Coordinated Anxiety Learning and Management(CALM) []) in 17 primary care clinics around the United
States. Investigators also conducted a qualitative process evaluation. Key research questions were as follows: (1)What were the facilitators/barriers to implementing CALM? (2) What were the facilitators/barriers to sustainingCALM after the study was completed?
Methods: Key informant interviews were conducted with 47 clinic staff members (18 primary care providers, 13
nurses, 8 clinic administrators, and 8 clinic staff) and 14 study-trained anxiety clinical specialists (ACSs) who
coordinated the collaborative care and provided cognitive behavioral therapy. The interviews were semistructuredand conducted by phone. Data were content analyzed with line-by-line analyses leading to the development andrefinement of themes.
Results: Similar themes emerged across stakeholders. Important facilitators to implementation included the
perception of “low burden ”to implement, provider satisfaction with the intervention, and frequent provider
interaction with ACSs. Barriers to implementation included variable provider interest in mental health, high rates of
part-time providers in clinics, and high social stressors of lower socioeconomic-status patients interfering withadherence. Key sustainability facilitators were if a clinic had already incorporated collaborative care for anotherdisorder and presence of onsite mental health staff. The main barrier to sustainability was funding for the ACS.
Conclusions: The CALM intervention was relatively easy to incorporate during the effectiveness trial, and
satisfaction was generally high. Numerous implementation and sustainability barriers could limit the reach and
impact of widespread adoption. Findings should be interpreted with the knowledge that the ACSs in this studywere provided and trained by the study. Future research should explore uptake of CALM and similar interventionswithout the aid of an effectiveness trial.
Background
A n x i e t yd i s o r d e r sa r eh i g h l yp r e v a l e n t .I nt h eU n i t e d
States, population surveys estimate that close to 29%
have experienced an anxiety disorder in their lifetime[1], while about 18% experience an anxiety disordereach year [2]. Individuals with anxiety disorders suffersignificant impairment and reduced quality of life [3-5],and they are costly to healthcare systems and economiesin general due to high use of healthcare and reducedproductivity [6-8]. Despite the high prevalence anddisease burden, only about one-third of persons withanxiety disorders receive treatment in a given year [9].
Most of the treatment sought for anxiety is in primary
care, and the most frequent treatment is medication[3,9]. While treatment guidelines recommend selectiveserotonin reuptake inhibit or medication and cognitive
behavioral therapy (CBT) as first-line treatments [10,11],CBT is under-utilized among anxiety patients [3], andthe quality of medication provided is suboptimal [9,12].
As primary care is the most frequent care location for
patients with anxiety, it is not surprising that clinicalresearch has focused on interventions for that setting.Many of the empirically supported interventions to datecan be characterized as “collaborative care, ”as they
* Correspondence: currangeoffreym@uams.edu
1Department of Psychiatry, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, AR, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14
Implementation
Science
© 2012 Curran et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
center around the activities of a care manager, usually a
nurse or social worker, who maintains relatively fre-quent contact with the patient; performs a range of psy-choeducational, therapeutic, and monitoring functions;and works as a liaison between the primary care provi-der and a consulting mental health professional, usually
a psychiatrist. While most of the research and imple-
mentation work in the field thus far has concerned itselfwith collaborative care for depression [13-15], a growingliterature supports collaborative-care interventions forpanic disorder [16,17] and for both panic disorder andgeneralized anxiety disorder [18]. Authors of the currentmanuscript [19] conducted a large randomized con-trolled trial of a collaborative-care intervention in 17
community primary clinics for four anxiety disorders
(generalized anxiety disorde r, panic disorder, posttrau-
matic stress disorder, and/or social anxiety disorder)and recently published data showing it is effective, withsmall to medium effects sizes ,i nc o m p a r i s o nt ot r e a t -
ment as usual [20].
Given the effectiveness of these interventions, a next
generation of work will likely pursue implementation
research and the development and testing of implemen-
tation interventions and strategies to support wide-spread adoption of collaborative care for anxietydisorders. This work will dr aw upon current models of
implementation (e.g., Greenhalgh et al., 2004; Fixsen,2005) [21,22] and the current implementation researchsupporting current “roll-out ”efforts for collaborative
c a r ef o rd e p r e s s i o n( a n do t h e rc h r o n i cc o n d i t i o n s )i n
large/national healthcare systems (e.g., the Department
of Veterans Affairs in the United States [15,23] and sev-eral countries in Europe [24]). However, the anxiety-specific collaborative-car e interventions might have
unique features and could pr esent their own barriers
and facilitators to translation into routine care, whetherthey are adopted on their own or in conjunction withother collaborative-care int erventions for other mental
health disorders such as depression or alcohol use dis-orders. To date, no implementation trials have beenconducted for anxiety collaborative-care interventions,and little is known about the presence or absence ofspecific barriers and facilitators to implementing andsustaining such an intervention.
The purpose of this paper is to present qualitative
data from a process evaluation of the Coordinated Anxi-
ety Learning and Management (CALM) intervention, as
part of a randomized controlled effectiveness trial of acollaborative-care for anxiety disorders. As noted above,results from this study have been recently publisheddemonstrating CALM ’s clinical effectiveness [20].
Alongside the effectiveness trial, investigators conducteda qualitative process evaluation focused on the imple-mentation of the CALM intervention in theparticipating clinics. In th e field of implementation
science, qualitative methods are frequently used toimprove understanding of healthcare contexts and toshed light on key implementation challenges [25-27].These methods are commonly part of what Stetler et al.[28] refer to as “developmental formative evaluation ”,
that is, context-specific “diagnostic ”evaluation of bar-
riers and facilitators to implementation, which leveragesthe experiences and lessons learned in effectivenesstrials to enhance the development of wider implementa-tion and dissemination inte rventions. The qualitative
study described here is just such a developmental for-mative evaluation. The key research questions were asfollows: (1) What were the facilitators/barriers to imple-
menting CALM? (2) What were t he facilitators/barriers
to sustaining CALM after the study was completed?
It should be noted here that the study investigated
implementation of the CALM intervention during a
clinical effectiveness trial-t he clinics were not explicitly
attempting to adopt the CALM intervention as part oftheir routine care. The collabo rative-care intervention-
ists were employees of the research study (though some
were previously employed by these same clinics), and
the providers were referring to them within the context
of a research study. However, many of the challengesand successes associated with implementing researchinterventions within community clinics are illustrativeand informative to future implementation efforts[29,30]. Further, in the current study, the investigatorsasked questions regarding the prospects of retaining the
intervention after the research grant was completed, and
t h o s ed a t aa r ed i r e c t l ya p p l i c a b l et ot h ei s s u eo fsustainability.
Methods
Context of the process evaluation: The CALM
effectiveness study
A total of 1004 adult primary care patients with one of
four anxiety disorders (generalized anxiety disorder,
panic disorder, posttraumati c stress disorder, or social
anxiety disorder) were recr u i t e df r o m1 7c l i n i c sw i t h i n
four national sites (Seattle, Los Angeles, San Diego, andLittle Rock). The clinics were purposively selected basedon a number of considerations, including clinician inter-est, space availability, size and diversity of patient popu-lation, and insuranc e mix. Anxiety clinical specialists
(ACSs) delivered education, self-activation in the contextof promoting medication adherence, and CBT to inter-vention patients and monitored their symptoms using aweb-based system in which they recorded anxiety anddepression ratings at each contact. Intervention patientschose CBT (34%), anti-anxiety medications (9%), orboth (57%) in a “stepped care ”treatment that varied
according to clinical need. ACSs were located on-site inCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 2 of 11
each clinic and conducted face-to-face CBT with the
assistance of a computerized program. ACSs interactedwith an off-site study psychiatrist as needed and com-municated clinical recommendations about medicationsbetween the study psychiatrist and the patients ’primary
care providers. Control patients received usual care
from their primary care clinician. Anxiety symptoms,
functioning, satisfaction with care, and healthcare utili-zation were assessed at six-month intervals. The salariesof the ACSs were covered by the study, and most facil-ities received some additional assistance/incentives, suchas fees, to cover the use of space and/or small amountsof salary coverage for clinic liaisons/champions whohelped facilitate the study.
CALM ’s innovations included (1) the flexibility to
treat any one of four anxiety disorders, co-occurringdepression, and/or alcohol abuse; (2) using on-site clini-cians (ACSs) to conduct initial assessments; (3) a com-puter-assisted psychothera py delivery system; and (4) a
web-based system customize d for anxiety status track-
ing. CALM was designed for easy dissemination in avariety of primary care settings.
Study locations
The 17 clinics can be categorized as members of largehealth maintenance organizations (HMOs; n = 4), feder-ally qualified community healthcare centers (n = 4), uni-versity-affiliated clinics (n = 4 ), or private clinics, either
free-standing or part of a hospital group (n = 5). Someof the private clinics and federally qualified centers,
however, had university affiliations to some extent,
though they were not located on university campuses.About two-thirds of the clinics were internal medicine,with the remaining being family practice. Less than halfof the clinics had an in-house mental health provider orproviders, and those professionals were usually master ’s-
trained clinicians (e.g., soc ial workers, counseling psy-
chologists). About three-fo urths of the clinics served
some uninsured patients.
Participants
The total number of participants in this qualitative key-informant interview study was 61, including 14 ACSshired and trained by the study to conduct the interven-tion, 18 primary care physicians (PCPs), 13 primary carenurses, and 16 primary care c linic administrators or
other staff members. The ACSs came from nursing orsocial work backgrounds almost exclusively, and all buttwo were female. Eleven of the PCPs were internal med-icine physicians, and the remaining seven were familypractice physicians. Twelve of the physicians werefemale, and six were male. The clinic nurses were a rela-tively even mixture of registered nurses, licensed practi-cal nurses, and licensed vocational nurses. All but twowere female. The clinic administrators interviewed (n =8) were the administrative leads for their clinics, and allbut three were female. The other “clinic staff ”infor-
mants were a mixture of front desk clerks, schedulingand administrative assistants, and project coordinators.All but one was female. No other personal or demo-
graphic information was collected from the participants.
While a substantial majority of the participants werefemale, we feel that the sample generally reflects thecharacteristics of the work environment and the gendermake-up of the majority of the professions sampled,namely, nursing, clinic administration, and social work.
In terms of recruitment, all of the ACSs were asked to
participate in the key informant interviews. Most of the
ACSs (N = 9) were interviewed twice, at a midpoint of
the intervention ’s implementation and at the conclusion
of the study. Four ACSs were interviewed only at themidpoint (two had moved on to another position by theendpoint of the study). One was interviewed only at theconclusion. Two ACSs refused to participate. Themajority of ACSs worked in one clinic at their respectivesites, but several worked in more than one (part-time)
across the span of the study. The PCPs, nurses, and
clinic administrators/staff with moderate-to-stronginvolvement in the CALM study (as rated by the studycoordinators and/or ACSs) were targeted and “over-
sampled ”for participation. The rationale for this was
that because the aim of the qu alitative implementation
study was to uncover barriers and facilitators to imple-mentation and sustainability of the intervention, it was
necessary to interview mostly those clinicians and staff
with at least moderate knowledge about the implemen-tation, firsthand, in their clinics. However, clinicians andstaff less involved with the CALM intervention (approxi-mately 20% of the sample) were also interviewed to pro-vide balance. The implications of this sampling strategy,both positive and negative, are discussed later in themanuscript. The clinician and staff participants were all
interviewed during the final year of the intervention. We
did not track approaches to and refusal rates of clini-cians and other staff. Some of the potential participantswere approached individually, based on their level ofparticipation with the CALM intervention, while otherswere collectively approached in open calls for participa-tion in meetings or via email. We did not predefine adesired number of participants per category or site;
however, we attempted to get at least two employees
per clinic to participate, including at least one clinician.
Data collection
The study protocol, consent forms, and interview guideswere reviewed and approved by the Institutional ReviewBoards at the University of Washington, the Universityof California at Los Angeles, the University of CaliforniaCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 3 of 11
at San Diego, and the University of Arkansas for Medi-
cal Sciences. After the study was described to potentialparticipants, written informed consent was obtained.Data were collected via key informant interviews byphone. Interview guides were used for each provider/staff group, including ACSs. While each guide elicited
some information specific to the provider/staff type, a
common core of questions was included in all of theinterview guides (see Table 1). The questions weredecided upon by the study investigators collectively, andthe team revised them several times, including after theinterviews began.
T h el e a da u t h o ri n t e r v i e w e dt h eA C Ss a m p l ea tt h e
study ’s close. One trained interviewer per host site
(Seattle, Los Angeles, San Diego, and Little Rock) inter-viewed their clinic ’s clinicians and staff. Interviews were
recorded and transcribed verbatim. In two instances, theaudio recorder malfunctioned and notes from the inter-viewer were used during coding.
Data analyses
Transcripts were content analyzed through a combina-
tion of manual coding of printed transcripts and electro-
nic coding using ATLAS.ti software (ATLAS.ti ScientificSoftware Development GmBH, Berlin, Germany). Con-tent analysis is a common research method for the sub-jective interpretation of text through a systematicprocess of classifying text into categories or themes thatrepresent similar meanings [31]. In the current study,the interview protocol was designed to support both
“conventional ”and inductive and “directed ”ap r i o r i
content analyses [32,33]. The protocol included a mix-
ture of “grand-tour ”type questions that are common
opening questions for inductive analyses (e.g., “Tell me
about your role and involvement in the CALM project ”
and “How was CALM implemented in your clinic and
how did it go? ”) and more specific questions/probes
informed by existing conceptual models ofimplementation [21,34], which focused on the organiza-tional context (norms and attitudes, routine care proce-dure, resources), the process of implementation (stage ofadoption, variation in implementation), and mechanismsof diffusion (influence of peers/leaders, change agents,incentives). With conventional content analyses, investi-
gators focus on descriptions of phenomena to identify
themes and concepts that emerge from reading theinterview transcript text without being constricted to aspecific theory or conceptual model of behavior (i.e.,keeping an open-as opposed to an empty-mind). Withdirected content analysis, investigators are guided by
existing theory or research findings and explore prede-termined themes or concepts in their coding. We
employed both types of content analysis, with an
emphasis on the former.
In terms of coding, the lead author coded the ACS
interviews himself, while he and another investigator co-coded the provider/staff interviews. When two coderswere involved, they independently coded identical sec-tions of text and compared coding and interpretations.Each subsample of participants ’transcripts was coded as
a group, in this sequence: ACSs, physicians, nurses,administrators, and staff. This method allowed thecoders to focus on that data and emergent themes ofone group at a time (as opposed to coding random tran-scripts), and the sequence allowed the coders to investi-gate the stakeholders most involved with the CALMintervention first (ACSs), then in descending order ofoverall stakeholder involvement in implementation.
Informed by the aims of the study and guided by pre-
v i o u se x a m p l e so fs i m i l a rimplementation analyses[25-27], the transcripts were first coded using the “top-
level ”codes (or “macro-themes ”)o f barriers/facilitators
to implementation and barriers/facilitators to sustain-
ability . Organizing the analyses around these top-level
codes [35] improved the “usability ”of the information
and allowed the data to be blended easily with other
reports documenting implementation barriers/facilitators
for major mental health initiatives. Top-level codes wereused to broadly categorize the data and represent infor-mants ’beliefs about which factors hindered or facilitated
implementation and/or sustainability of the CALMintervention and how the intervention could beimproved. Further subcoding of categories within eachtop-level code came next. The subcoding step assigned
new codes that described the content of the barriers/
facilitators reported by the participants (e.g., “provider
interest in mental health issues ”as a facilitator of imple-
mentation). A third coding step classified the individu-ally categorized barriers/fa cilitators into types, such as
“provider attitudes/behaviors as facilitators ”and “clinic
structure-related barriers. ”This last step was interpre-
tive, representing the views of the coders. The final list
Table 1 Core questions for all qualitative interviews
1. How did CALM operate in your clinic?
2. What worked and what didn’ t work?
3. How did CALM affect workload, burden, and space?
4. How was CALM received by you and others in your site and how
did that change over time?
5. Were there “champions ”or “opinion leaders ”for CALM?
6. Did the communication between the ACS, the external psychiatrist,
and local PCPs work?
7. What outcomes are/were you seeing?
8. What changes should be made to CALM?9. What are the prospects for CALM being sustained and why?
CALM = Coordinated Anxiety Learning and Management; ACS = anxiety
clinical specialist; PCP = primary care physicianCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 4 of 11
of codes consisted of behaviors, attitudes, personal char-
acteristics, contexts, processes, and policies the infor-mants believed to be associated with theimplementation and sustainability of the CALMintervention.
Results
While numerous barriers and facilitators were recog-nized and reported by the informants, we chose to high-light here those reported most often and those referredto by the participants as the most salient from their per-spective. Additional information about the full range ofbarriers and facilitators is available from the authors.Below we present barriers and facilitators to implemen-
tation and sustainability, across stakeholder and clinic
types, organized by the following subcategories: providerattitudes/behavior, clinic structure, intervention charac-teristics, and patient characteristics (See also Table 2).Barriers/facilitators are noted in italicized text. Exemplarquotations are contained in Additional file 1.
Barriers to implementation
Provider attitudes/behaviors
The most often cited barrier to implementation across
stakeholders was uneven physician “buy-in ”or support
for the CALM intervention within clinics. A common
pattern emerged: some physicians were highly motivatedto participate in the intervention, some were marginallyso, and some were not at all motivated to participate.The highly motivated physicians were usually less than
half of the total number of physicians in a clinic.
Further, participants across stakeholder groups recog-nized that it was challenging to increase physician inter-
est. Many participants speculated that the less
enthusiastic physicians were not comfortable with treat-ing mental health. Others noted that low enthusiasmcould also be linked to providers (both physicians andnurses) feeling that the prevalence of anxiety was low in
their clinic. Also, many physicians reported that enthu-
siasm for the intervention could wane without supportiveattention from “champions ”or “opinion leaders. ”
Clinic structure
Two very commonly noted barriers to implementationacross stakeholder group and clinic types were high pre-
valence of part-time primary care providers and space
concerns for the ACS. The ACS and physician stake-
holder groups especially reported concerns about part-
time physicians (including residents) being harder toreach with information about CALM than full-time pro-viders, and thus it was harder to engage with them andfacilitate their involvement. University-affiliated clinicswith large numbers of residents seemed most impactedby the barrier. Informants from all stakeholder groupsand clinic types noted barriers associated with findingadequate space for the ACSs to do their work. If anACS ’s work space was not proximal to the providers,
their relationships with th em suffered. Further, if an
ACS had no permanent or reliable place to work, aTable 2 Major Themes
Major Theme Subtheme
Barriers to
Implementation
Provider attitudes/behaviorsUneven physician “buy in ”
Enthusiasm could wane without continuedintervention
Feeling that prevalence of anxiety was low in
their clinic
Clinic structure Part-time primary care providers harder to
reach
Space concerns for ACS
Intervention
characteristicsPart-time ACS
Communication with ACSs sometime
unsatisfactory
Some nurses felt “out of the loop ”and not
consistent targets for education and
marketing
Patient characteristics Challenges of Low SES patients
Hispanic patients resistant to CALM
Drop-outs weaken enthusiasm among
providers and staff
Facilitators toImplementation
Provider attitudes/
behaviorsInterest in mental health increases uptake
Buy-in/support from nurses/staff
Clinic structure Presence of MH professional
Reliable and appropriate space for ACS
Intervention
characteristicsACS in clinic full time (or close)
“Face-time ”with providers/relationships
CALM not overly burdensome
Providers appreciated referral source and
additional care
Positive feedback from/about patientsProviders very positive about ACS
Patient Characteristics Prefer coming to primary careBarriers to Sustaining
CALM
Clinic structure Paying for ACS service
Space for ACS and doing therapy
Facilitators to
Sustaining CALM
-Provider attitudes Providers high value of CALM
-Clinic structure Already doing CC for other disorders
Presence of MH person who could adopt
MH = mental health; ACS = anxiety clinical specialist; PCP = primary care
physician; CALM = Coordinated Anxiety Learning and Management; SES =
socioeconomic status; CBT = cognitive behavioral therapy; CC = collaborative
care.Curran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 5 of 11
common issue in many clinics, this also hindered com-
munication with providers and negatively impactedreferrals.
Intervention characteristics
An often cited barrier to implementation within thiscategory was ACSs who worked part-time in a clinic .
Referrals are hindered when an ACS is on-site only cer-tain days per week to receive them. Also, less “face time ”
in the clinic means less communication and fewer oppor-tunities for building rappo rt with clinic providers and
staff. Some physicians discussed communication with
ACSs being unsatisfactory . Interestingly, the nature of the
dissatisfaction was not uniform. In fact, some physicianswanted more frequent and extensive communication
with the ACS, while others felt there was too much. A
goal of the CALM intervention was to customize com-munications with providers to meet their requests/needsfor monitoring patients, and it appears that this was notoptimized during the study. In addition, some nurses
reported feeling “out of the loop” between their PCPs, the
ACSs, and the off-site psychiatrist, and they felt that theycould not act as “champions ”for the intervention when
they were out of the loop. This barrier could also fallunder the category of clinic structure if its genesis hadmore to do with pre-existing clinic culture. Some nursesalso reported only hearing about the intervention fromtheir PCP, indicating that in some clinics the nurses were
not consistent targets for education and marketing about
the intervention.
Patient characteristics
Some physicians noted that when patients drop out or “no
show ”for their ACS appointments, this can weaken their
enthusiasm for the intervention. Perhaps related to this, a
patient-related barrier noted among ACSs working inclinics with high numbers of uninsured was that the high
overall disease burden and social stressors among lowersocioeconomic status (SES) patients seemed to make itharder for those patients to engage in the intervention.
The pressures of unstable employment, housing, andtransportation appeared to negatively affect how somepatients prioritized their anxiety treatment. Two ACSswho worked in clinics that saw many Hispanic patientsnoted that in general, Hispanic patients were reluctant to
engage in the CALM intervention . They speculated that
culturally bound beliefs about mental illness were contri-buting to males being resistant to admitting a problem
and females not getting necessary support from their
families to participate in the sessions.
Facilitators to implementation
Provider attitudes/behaviors
Implementation seemed to go smoothly and referrals to
the ACS were most plentiful when physicians (espe-cially) and nurses had enthusiastically “bought in ”to theintervention .T h ef a c t o rm o s tl i n k e dt os t r o n gb u y - i n
was a belief that mental health concerns should be a
priority . This is the inverse of the buy-in barrier noted
above. It is unclear to what extent education and out-reach efforts of the study investigators and the ACSsinfluenced this priority setting. When the ACSs were
asked to speculate on this point, they reported that
most of the enthusiastic providers were that way “from
the get go, ”indicating that many providers were posi-
tively predisposed to a mental health intervention.Approximately half of the providers interviewed self-identified as champions of the intervention. Some ACSsmade the point that a highly “bought in ”nurse could act
as a champion and facilitate numerous contacts and
referrals, even in the case wh ere his/her physician was
not as enthusiastic. Informants from all of the stake-holder groups noted that when positive outcomes of
patients were communicated, this increased providerenthusiasm and referral activity. Additionally, when
reduced somatic complain ts were observed in some
patients, provider enthusiasm increased .I na d d i t i o n ,
among those with a favorable view of CALM, providers
did not need to see dramatic improvements in their
patients to maintain a positive attitude towards theintervention. As well, most provider informants saidthey appreciated the additional referral source .
Clinic structure
Two related facilitators in this category were pre-existing
presence of a mental health provider and pre-existing
presence of collaborative-care services for another disor-
der. If the providers were in the habit of referring
patients to another mental health specialist within their
clinic, or were in the habit of using a collaborative-carecoordinator of some kind, th ose factors facilitated the
u s eo ft h eA C S .T h el a r g eH M Oc l i n i c sw e r et h em o s tlikely to be already employing a collaborative-care coor-dinator for another disorder (e.g., diabetes commonlyand, in one case, depression). As noted above, the in-
house mental health professionals were usually master ’s-
level clinicians. The interviews with the ACSs did not
uncover much information about their relationship withthese providers, though some found them to be “good
referrers. ”
Intervention characteristics
Perhaps the most universal facilitator across clinic stake-holders was that the CALM intervention was not overly
burdensome . The physicians and nurses reported little to
no increased burden in their workload, and many noted
reductions in their workload as a result of reduced
somatic complaints. The vast majority found the referral
processes very easy and that referrals worked best when
the ACSs were in the clinic full time. While it was usualfor providers to leave a paper-and-pencil or electronicreferral note for the ACSs to follow up on, someCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 6 of 11
providers liked to have the ACS join their encounter
with the patient for a face-to-face “hand-off. ”These
face-to-face hand-offs were certainly easier when theACSs were in the clinic full-time, but the other kinds ofreferrals were also more quickly acted upon when theACS was in the clinic full-time. Further, the ACSs
found that the more they had “face time ”with providers
to discuss CALM and establish rapport, the better the
implementation went. Face time could occur in the hall-ways, at lunchtime, or during staff meetings. From theclinic stakeholder point of view, when ACSs were seen
as warm, engaging, and visible , they received high
marks. And most of the informants who commentedspecifically about their ACS did so very positively. Most
of the providers found the distribution of flyers and
information about the study in the patient rooms and/or
waiting rooms to be helpful, with this resulting in many
patients presenting their concerns about anxiety andasking about the intervention without needing to bescreened or prompted.
Patient characteristics
The main patient-level facilitator seemed to be that
many expressed their prefer ence to these informants
(especially the nurses) that they prefer coming to primary
care for their mental health issues . This preference
seemed to be rooted in both the ease of coming there
("one-stop shopping” ) and that stigma was reduced by
coming to primary care and seeing a mental health pro-vider there.
Barriers to sustainability
Clinic structure
The two main barriers expressed by the vast majority of
stakeholders were paying for the ACS services and space
for the ACS . Most, but not all, of the stakeholders
expressed doubt that the intervention would be main-tained and that the main “culprit ”would be the diffi-
culty in paying for the ACS. A payor or payors would
have to decide to reimburse for the services, an external
source would have to provide the service for free (e.g., auniversity psychiatry depa rtment), or the clinic would
have to pay for the employee themselves. In the lattercase, the informants indicated that a strong “business
case ”would have to be made in favor of it and that this
seemed unlikely at the present time. Further, many par-ticipants noted their difficulty in finding appropriate
space for the ACS during the intervention, and they sus-
pected that this would continue if they tried to sustainthe intervention.
Facilitators to sustainability
Provider attitudes/behavior
Numerous providers and administrators reported a posi-
tive opinion about the CALM intervention and expressedthat they would like to see CALM continue in their
clinic . Many informants reported that, overall, the inter-
vention increased their clinic ’s awareness of anxiety and
that increased their desire to continue treating anxiety.
Clinic structure
The clinics that already have a mental health provider
or a collaborative-care program for another disorder felt
more confident that sustaining CALM was possible or
even probable in a minority of cases.
Discussion
Overall results and key findings
This qualitative process evaluation found, in general, thatthe CALM collaborative-care intervention for multiple
anxiety disorders was not overly burdensome to provi-
ders and staff, and it was relatively easy to incorporateinto the clinics ’routine. Satisfaction with the intervention
among these respondents was generally high. Primarycare providers appreciated the additional referral sourceand the feedback they received from the ACS and psy-chiatrist. The majority of informants reported seeingmoderate improvements in enough patients for them to
find value in the intervention. A majority of informants
stated, without being prompted, they would like to seethe intervention continue after the clinical effectivenessstudy was over. We did not see much evidence of out-right “resistance” to the CALM intervention, rather more
a lack of motivation/buy-in from a number of providersand some not seeing it as solving key concerns of theclinics, which served more as a challenge to sustainability
than uptake during the clinical trial.
There were many important facilitators to implemen-
tation, perhaps the most important being positive atti-
tudes about the intervention among providers (buy-in).Providers who held a pre-existing belief in the impor-tance of recognizing and treating mental health pro-blems in primary care, who found the intervention
nonburdensome, who perceived the ACS as visible and
well-liked, who valued the feedback from the clinical
team, and who observed positive patient outcomes(especially reduced somatic complaints) were those whomost enthusiastically supported the intervention. Otherfacilitators were a reliable and proximate location of theACS ’s workspace, having the ACS work full-time in the
clinic, “face time ”for ACSs to interact frequently with
providers, and the perception of a relatively high preva-
lence of anxiety among clinic patients. Those clinics
with previous experience with an on-site mental health
provider and/or collaborative-care interventionistappeared to more readily implement the intervention. Itis also possible that clinics with pre-existing mentalhealth providers attracted a greater number of patientswith anxiety disorders, and therefore, those clinics mighthave recognized a greater benefit of the intervention.Curran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 7 of 11
Numerous barriers to implementation were also
found. First and foremost, it was clear that not all provi-
ders bought in to the intervention. Some were infre-quent users of the intervention, and some never used itat all. For some, this relative lack of use appeared to betied to their impression that anxiety prevalence was low
in their clinics. For others, the lack of use appeared to
be linked to a general lack of comfort with treatingmental illness or a belief that mental health should notbe treated in primary care. Further, these providers didnot seem to respond to (or perhaps did not attend) tra-ditional educational sessions by experts presenting evi-dence on anxiety prevalence and effectiveness ofcollaborative-care interventions. It is possible that addi-
tional marketing of the in tervention might have
improved provider buy-in. However, many of the provi-
ders ’attitudes might have been relatively easily fixed.
Future research should test the effect of various market-ing strategies in primary care clinics.
In addition, it was clear that nurses in some clinics
served as key advocates and sources of referral. Yet, thestudy did not specifically market to clinic nurses or pro-
vide educational opportunities for them. This was an
important oversight. Future studies should consideractive promotion of primar yc a r ei n t e r v e n t i o n sw i t h
clinic nursing staff. Other key barriers to implementa-tion were having large numbers of part-time primarycare providers within a clinic, using a part-time ACS, alack of dedicated space for ACSs, unsatisfactory commu-nication with ACSs, and engagement challenges related
to low SES and Hispanic patients. Important barriers to
sustainability of the intervention were the cost of theACS (a “deal-breaking ”barrier) and space concerns.
There were not many dramatic differences in reaction
to the intervention across stakeholder groups or clinictypes, but a few differences did emerge. Clinic adminis-trators/managers, who were usually those charged with
finding ACS work space and overseeing clinic opera-
tions, reported the most ini tial skepticism about the
intervention and reported experiencing the most burden
caused by the intervention. The burden, however, wasstill mild to moderate, and administrators were generallyquite positive about the intervention. In terms of clinictypes, the federally qualified community health centerswere perhaps at some disadvantage because more oftheir patients were low SES, and those patients seemed
t os t r u g g l em o r ew i t he n g a g e m e n t .A tt h es a m et i m e ,
providers in these clinics seemed to especially appreciatethe additional referral source (a free mental health inter-vention for their patients). Offering CBT was also a keydraw for participation as some of the providers reportedvery little access to CBT, even when a patient wasinsured. Two clinics administered by a large, regionalHMO and one university-affiliated clinic had experiencewith collaborative-care inte rventions, and providers in
these clinics were more likely to think that sustainabilitywould be feasible.
Findings in context of the literature
Most of the barriers and facilitators found in this study
are consistent with leading conceptual models of disse-
mination and implementation in healthcare and theempirical literatures supp orting them. For example,
numerous barriers and facilitators to implementationand sustainability reported by informants had to do withprovider beliefs, attitudes, motivation, and norms, andthese are central determinants of implementation in themodels of Mendel et al. [34], Greenhalgh et al. [21], and
Damschroder et al. [36]. These “personal ”determinants
certainly interact with the characteristics of the innova-
tion. Most implementation models in healthcare place agood deal of emphasis on predisposing characteristics ofthe innovation for implementation success. For example,Greenhalgh et al. ’s [21] model, based on empirical find-
ings, posits that an innovat ion has a better chance of
successful adoption when it has demonstrated clinical
advantage (via research evid ence), compatibility with
existing practices, observability (of results), low com-
plexity, and potential for local tailoring. These samegeneral attributes are also reflected in the diffusion andimplementation models of Rogers [37] and Damschro-der et al. [36]. Innovation characteristics interact notonly with provider/staff-level attributes but also withclinic-level attributes such as culture (norms and prac-
tices of the system) and climate (worker ’s perceptions
of, and reaction to, the characteristics of the work envir-
onment) [38]. We found that if the clinic culture hadprevious experience with collaborative care and/or mak-ing internal referrals for mental health conditions, thispromoted both successful implementation and increasedthe perception of sustainability. This study also identi-fied barriers and facilitators associated with how the
intervention was supported “on the ground ”by study
and clinic staff. Central to the Promoting Action on
ResearchImplementation in Health Services (PARIHS)implementation framework is the notion of facilitation,defined as “making things easier for others ”[39]. This
model suggests that implem entation success is maxi-
mized when there are coordinated efforts to encourageparticipation, promote action, create supportive systems,
and monitor and feedback progress. This study suggests
that clinics in which ACSs operated not only as clini-cians but also as facilitators in conjunction with localchampions were more successful. Lastly, this studyfound the major barrier to sustainability to be financial(i.e., paying for the key interventionist). Most implemen-tation models recognize and emphasize the cost andpayor factor, along with others making up the “outerCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 8 of 11
context ”of implementation (e.g., the socio-political cli-
mate, mandates, and incentives) [21,34,36,40].
It was apparent from the analyses that at least two
“meta-themes ”emerged-the first being associated with
communication . Many of the barriers and facilitators we
found appear related to positive communication among
the ACS, primary care staff, and study-provided psychia-
trist, for example, satisfaction with communication withthe ACS, nurses being in or out of “the loop, ”positive
clinical outcomes being communicated to the providers,ACSs being part-time or full-time, face-to-face hand-offsof patients, and space (proximity to ACSs). These com-munication issues are certa inly linked to rapport and
trust, and together they form a necessary foundation for
a working collaborative rel ationship. It is clear from
these analyses that for a collaborative-care intervention
to be successfully implemented, there need to be posi-tive lines of communication created that foster rapportand trust. The second meta-theme relates to the lack of
anxiety-specific barriers and facilitators observed. Mostof the barriers and facilitators were similar to thosenoted for depression collaborative care and perhaps
other collaborative-care interventions in other non-men-
tal health conditions [15,41]. The one anxiety-specificbarrier mentioned was a perceived low prevalence ofanxiety in some clinics. This could mean that interven-t i o n ss u c ha sC A L Mf o ra n x i e t yd i s o r d e r sw o u l db eamenable to being combined with other collaborative-care interventions, at least for mental health conditions,as seems to be the current thrust in some health sys-
tems [42]. Such combinations could be more cost effec-
tive and improve the “business case. ”The CALM
intervention already combi ned multiple anxiety disor-
ders and had a companion module for comorbiddepression.
Implications and future directions
The next step in the research agenda for CALM investi-
gators will be to develop and test an implementation
strategy to facilitate adoption under more naturalisticcircumstances, that is, without research funding cover-ing the ACS salaries and other cost offsets. Thisresearch provides important data to inform the develop-ment of such an implementation strategy. The data pre-sented here indicate that th e implementation strategy
should, at a minimum, include the following elements:
1) A marketing plan designed to engage those whoare not predisposed to identifying and treating men-tal health problems in primary care [15] andincludes physicians, nurses, and administrators.2) Encouragement of the clinic participants to tailorthe intervention to their needs [43], with special
attention paid to the process of communicationbetween providers and the collaborative-care team(ACS and psychiatrist) and space for the ACSs.Roles and responsibilities of champions and opinionleaders should also be made explicit [27,44], withsome consideration given to training champions
and/or opinion leaders in evidence-based facilitation
strategies [44].
3) A process for delivering “easily digestible ”out-
comes data elements to providers and staff to rein-force uptake [45].4) Additional features to support engagement oflower SES patients Hispanic patients.5) A focus on financing. Bachman and colleagues[46] have outlined an array of possible funding
mechanisms for depression care management that
also apply to CALM, for example, practice-basedcare management on a fee-for-service basis, practice-based care management under contract to healthplans, group-model HMO internal funding, andthird-party-based care management under contractto health plans. Any implementation strategy wouldneed to include efforts at securing “coverage ”of the
ACS.
Study limitations and strengths
The study has several limitations that deserve mention.As noted above, this study investigated barriers andfacilitators to the implementation of the CALM inter-vention during a clinical effectiveness trial. The implica-
tions derived here, while contributing to accumulating
findings on collaborative-care interventions, still need tobe tested in future implementation trials and observa-tional studies of real-world adoption in order to be gen-eralizable. Further, the timings of the clinic provider andstaff interventions were not uniform. They occurredduring the final year of a two-year intervention. There-fore, “exposure ”to the intervention and its outcomes
varied considerably, and this difference could haveimpacted the results. Perhaps most importantly, thesampling strategy likely introduced a positive bias inthat most of the participants were at least moderateusers of CALM, and such users were more likely to bepositively predisposed to the intervention. The investiga-tors decided that the majority of respondents shouldhave at least moderate experience with the intervention
to be able to provide the richest feedback. To counteract
this bias, we did interview p roviders and staff with less
or no direct involvement with the CALM intervention.Also, the ACS interviews asked specific questions aboutprovider and staff buy-in from the perspective of theclinic as a whole, which also contributed balance.
The study has several strengths that also deserve men-
tion. Very few clinical effectiveness studies devote theCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 9 of 11
time and resources to an implementation-focused pro-
cess evaluation. By doing so, the investigators were ableto gather useful data to help them plan for future imple-mentation efforts and reduce the time between develop-ment of research findings and adoption in routine caresettings. Further, the process evaluation was large in
scope, encompassing 61 key informants from multiple
perspectives across 17 clinics. The use of semistructuredinterview guides contributed consistency and reliability
to the data collection but did not limit the flow of con-versation or discovery of themes. Also, “saturation ”was
reached, indicating that the number of interviews perstakeholder group was sufficient to fully explore thephenomena under study.
Conclusions
This study demonstrated that the CALM intervention isimplementable in community settings within a clinicalresearch context and supported by appropriate facilita-tion provided by research investigators and staff. Futureresearch will develop and test implementationinterventions.
Additional material
Additional file 1: Major themes and exemplar quotations from
informants .
AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by grant K01 DA15102 (Curran) from the NationalInstitute on Drug Abuse and by U01 MH070022 (Sullivan), U01 MH058915
(Craske), U01 MH070018 (Sherbourne), U01 MH057858 (Roy-Byrne), and K24
MH64122 (Stein) from the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). Thisproject was also supported by the National Center for Research Resourcesand the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, NationalInstitutes of Health, through grant UL1RR029884. Data from this manuscriptwere presented at the National Conference on Mental Health Services
Research sponsored by NIMH, Washington, DC, July 23-24, 2009, and the
Anxiety Disorders Association of America Annual Conference, Baltimore, MD,March 4-5, 2010.
Author details
1Department of Psychiatry, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little
Rock, AR, USA.2Mental Health QUERI, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare
System, North Little Rock, AR, USA.3VA South Central Mental Illness
Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Central Arkansas Veterans
Healthcare System, North Little Rock, AR, USA.4RAND Corporation, Santa
Monica, CA, USA.5David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California,
Los Angeles, CA, USA.6Departments of Psychiatry and Family and Preventive
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.7Department of
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington School ofMedicine, Seattle, WA, USA.
8Harborview Center for Healthcare Improvement
for Addictions, Mental Illness, and Medically Vulnerable Populations(CHAMMP), Seattle, WA, USA.
Authors ’contributions
GMC participated in the design of the study, performed data analyses, and
took the lead in drafting the manuscript. GS conceived of the study withother co-authors, participated in its design and coordination, and helped todraft the manuscript. PM conceived of the study with other co-authors,participated in its design and coordination, and helped to draft themanuscript. MGC conceived of the study with other co-authors andparticipated in its design and coordination. MBS conceived of the study withother co-authors and participated in its design and coordination. CDSconceived of the study with other co-authors and participated in its designand coordination. AM participated in the study ’s design, helped coordinate
the study, and performed data analyses. PRB conceived of the study with
other co-authors, participated in its design and coordination, and helped to
draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 4 January 2011 Accepted: 9 March 2012
Published: 9 March 2012
References
1. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR, Walters EE: Lifetime
prevalence and age-of-onset distributions of DSM-IV disorders in the
National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005,
62:593-768.
2. Kessler RC, Chui WT, Demler O, Walters EE: Prevalence, severity, and
comorbidity of 12-month dsm-iv disorders in the National ComorbiditySurvey Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005, 62:617-709.
3. Kroenke K, Sptzer RL, Williams JB, Monahan POLowe B: Anxiety disorders in
primary care: prevalence, impairment, comorbidity, and detection. Ann
Intern Med 2007, 146:317-325.
4. Cramer V, Torgersen S, Kringlen E: Quality of life and anxiety disorders: a
population study. J Nerv Ment Dis 2005, 193:196-202.
5. Sherbourne CD, Sullivan G, Craske M, Roy-Byrne P, Golinelli D, Rose R,
Chavira D, Bystritsky A, Stein M: Functioning and disability levels in
primary care out-patients with one or more anxiety disorders. Psychol
Med 2010, doi:10.1017/S0033291710000176. Published Online by Cambridge
University Press.
6. Strine TW, Mokdad AH, Balluz LS, Gonzalez O, Crider R, Berry JT, Kroenke K:
Depression and anxiety in the United States: finding from the 2006behavioral risk factor surveillance system. Psychiatr Serv 2008,
59:1383-1390.
7. Kessler RC, Keller MMB, Wittchen HU: The epidemiology of generalized
anxiety disorder. Psychiatr Clin of North Am 2001, 1:19-39.
8. Greenberg PE, Sisitsky T, Kessler RC, Finkelstein SN, Berndt ER, Davidson JR,
Ballenger JC, Fyer AJ: The economic burden of anxiety disorders in the
1990s. J Clin Psychiatry 1999, 60:427-435.
9. Wang PS, Lane M, Olfson M, Pincus HA, Wells KB, Kessler RC: Twelve-
month use of mental health services in the United States: results fromthe National Comorbidity Survey Republication. Arch Gen Psychol 2005,
62:629-640.
10. National Institute for Clinical Excellence: Anxiety: management of anxiety
in adults in primary, secondary, and community care. Clinical Guideline22.London: National Institute for Clinical Excellence; 2005.
11. Terluin B, va Heest FB, van der Meer K: Guideline Anxiety Disorders Dutch
College of General Practitioners (first version). Huisarts en Wetenschap
2004, 47:26-37.
12. Roy-Byrne PP, Russo J, Dugdale DC, Lessler D, Cowley DS, Katon W:
Undertreatment of Panic Disorder in Primary Care: role of patient andphysician characteristics. J Am Board of Family Practice 2002, 15:443-450.
13. Simon G: Collaborative care for mood disorders. Curr Opin Psychiatry 2008,
22:37-41.
14. Gillbody S, Bower P, Fletcher J, Richards D, Sutton AJ: Collaborative Care
for depression: a cumulative meta-analysis and review of longer-term
outcomes. Arch Intern Med 2006, 166:2314-2321.
15. Smith JL, Williams JW, Owen RR, Rubenstein LV, Chaney E: Developing a
national dissemination plan for collaborative care for depression: QUERI
series. Implement Sci 2008, 3:59.
16.
Roy-Byrne PP, Craske MG, Stein MB, Sullivan G, Bystritsky A, Kation W,
Golinelli D, Sherbourne CD: A randomized effectiveness trial of cognitive-
behavioral therapy and medication for primary care panic disorder. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 2005, 62:290-298.
17. Roy-Byrne PP, Katon W, Cowley DS, Russo J: A randomized effectiveness
trial of collaborative care for patients with panic disorder. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 2001, 58:869-876.Curran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 10 of 11
18. Rollman BL, Herbeck BB, Reynolds CF, Schulberg HC, Shear MK: A
contemporary protocol to assist primary care physicians in the
treatment of panic and generalized anxiety disorders. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry 2003, 25:74-82.
19. Sullivan G, Craske MG, Sherbourne C, Edlund MJ, Rose RD, Golinelli D,
Chavira DA, Bystritsky A, Stein MB, Roy-Byrne PP: Design of the
coordinated anxiety learning and management (CALM) study:innovations in collaborative care for anxiety disorders. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry 2007, 29:370-387.
20. Roy-Byrne PP, Craske MG, Sullivan G, Rose RD, Edlund MJ, Lang AI,
Bystritsky A, Welch SS, Chavira DA, Golinelli D, Campbell-Sills L,
Sherbourne CD, Stein MB: Delivery of evidence-based treatment for
multiple anxiety disorders in primary care: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2010, 303:1921-1928.
21. Greenhalgh T, Robert G, Macfarlane F, Bate P, Kyriakidou O: Diffusion of
innovations on service organizations: systematic review andrecommendations. Milbank Q 2004, 82:581-629.
22. Fixsen DL, Naoom SF, Blasé KA, Friedman RM, Wallace F: Implementation
Research: A Synthesis of the Literature. The National Implementation
Research Network (FMHI Publication #23) University of South Florida, Louis
de la Parta Florida Mental Health Institute; 2005.
23. Luck J, Hagigi F, Parker LE, Yano EM, Rubenstein LV, Kirchner JE: A social
marketing approach to implementing evidence-based practice in VHAQUERI: the TIDES depression collaborative care model. Implement Sci
2009, 4:64.
24. De Jong J, Van Steenbergen-Weijenburg KM, Huijbregts KM, Vlasveld MC,
Van Marwijk HW, Beekman AT, Van Der Feltz-Cornelis CM: The depression
initiative. Description of a collaborative care model for depression and of the
factors influencing its implementation in the primary care setting in theNetherlands. Int J Inter Care 2009, 9:e81.
25. Palinkas LA, Schoenwald SK, Hoaqwood K, Landsverk J, Chorpita BF,
Weisz JR: An ethnographic study of implementation of evidence-based
treatments in child mental health: first steps. Psychiatr Serv 2008,
59:738-746.
26. Brunette MF, Asher D, Whitley R, Lutz WJ, Weider BL, Jones AM,
McHugo GJ: Implementation of integrated dual disorders treatment: a
qualitative Ananlysis of facilitators and barriers. Psychiatr Serv 2008,
59:989-995.
27. Curran GM, Thrush CR, Smith JL, Ritchie M, Owen RR, Chadwick D:
Implementing research findings into practice using clinical opinionleaders: barriers and lessons learned. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2006,
31:700-707.
28. Stetler B, Legro MW, Wallace CM, Bowman C, Guihan M, Guihan M,
Hagedorn H, Kimmel B, Sharp ND, Smith JL: The role of formative
evaluation in implementation research and the QUERI experience. J Gen
Intern Med 2006, 2:S1-S8.
29. Tai B, Straus MM, Lui D, Sparenborg S, Jackson R, McCarty D: The first
decade of the National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network:bridging the gap between research and practice to improve drug abusetreatment. J Subst Abuse Treat 2010, 38(Suppl 1):S4-S13.
30. Martino S, Brigham GS, Higgins C, Gallon S, Freese TE, Albright LM,
Hulsey E, Krom L, Storti SA, Perl H, Nugent CD, Pintello D, Condon TP:Partnerships and pathways of dissemination: The National Institute onDrug Abuse-Substance Abuse and Mental Health ServicesAdministration: blending Initiative in the Clinical Trials Network. J Subst
Abuse Treat 2010, 38(suppl 1):S31-S43.
31. Weber RP: Basic Content Analysis Beverly Hills, CA: Sage; 1990.
32. Hsieh HF, Shannon SE: Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.
Qual Health Res 2005, 15:1277-1288.
33. Bernard HR: Research methods in anthropology: qualitative and quantitative
methods (3 rd ed.) Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press; 2002.
34. Mendel P, Meredith LS, Schoenbaum M, Sherbourne CD, Wells KB:
Intervention in organizational and community context: a framework for
building evidence on dissemination and implementation in health
services research. Adm Policy Ment Health 2008, 35:21-37.
35. Parker LE, Kirchner JE, Bonner LM, Fickel JJ, Ritchie MJ, Simons CE, Yano EM:
Creating a quality-improvement dialogue: utilizing knowledge fromfrontline staff, managers, and experts to foster health care qualityimprovement. Qual Health Res 2009, 19:229-242.
36. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC:
Fostering implementation of health services research finding intopractice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementationscience. Implement Sci 2009, 4:50.
37. Rogers E: Diffusion of Innovations. 5 edition. New York, NY: Free Press; 2003.
38. Aarons GA, Sawitzky AC: Organizational culture and climate and mental
health provider attitudes towards evidence-based practice. Psychol Serv
2006, 3:61-72.
39. Kitson A, Harvey G, McCormack B: Enabling the implementation of
evidence based practice: A conceptual framework. Qual Health Care 1998,
7:149-158.
40. In Improving patient care: The implementation of change in clinical practice.
Edited by: Grol R, Wensing, M, Eccles M. Edinburg, UK: Elsevier; 2005:.
41. Bray P, Cummings DM, Wolf M, Massing MW, Reaves J: After the
collaborative is over: What sustains quality improvement initiatives inprimary care practices? Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2009, 35(10) :502-508.
42. Post EP, Metzger M, Duma P, Lehmann L: Integrating mental health into
primary care within the Veterans Health Administration. Fam Syst Health
2010, 28(2) :83-90.
43. Curran GM, Allee ME, Mukherjee S, Owen R: QUERI series: a process for
developing implementation interventions. Implement Sci 2008, 3:17.
44. Borbas C, Morris N, McLaughlin B, Asinger R, Gobel F: The role of clinical
opinion leaders in guideline implementation and quality improvement.Chest 2000, 118:24S-32S.
45. Fortney J, Pyne J, Smith J, Curran G, Otero J, Enderle M, McDougall S: Steps
for implementing collaborative care programs for depression. Popul
Health Manag 2009, 12:69-79.
46. Bachman J, Pincus HA, Houtsinger JK, Unutzer J: Funding mechanisms for
depression care management: opportunities and challenges. Gen Hosp
Psychiatry 2006, 28:278-288.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-14
Cite this article as: Curran et al .:Implementation of the CALM
intervention for anxiety disorders: a qualitative study. Implementation
Science 2012 7:14.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitCurran et al.Implementation Science 2012, 7:14
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/14Page 11 of 11
