Claremont Colleges Claremont Colleges 
Scholarship @ Clar emont Scholarship @ Clar emont 
CGU F aculty Publications and Resear ch CGU F aculty Scholarship 
2015 
From Ideas t o Efficacy: The ORBI T Model for De veloping From Ideas t o Efficacy: The ORBI T Model for De veloping 
Beha vioral Treatments for Chr onic Diseases Beha vioral Treatments for Chr onic Diseases 
Susan M. Czajkowski 
National Cancer Institute 
Lynda H. P owell 
Rush Univ ersity Medical Center 
Nancy Adler 
Univ ersity of California, San F rancisco 
Sylvie Naar-King 
Wayne State Univ ersity 
Kim D . Reynolds 
Claremont Gr aduate Univ ersity 
See next page for additional authors 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /scholarship.clar emont.edu/cgu_fac_pub 
 Part of the Analytical, Diagnostic and Ther apeutic T echniques and E quipment Commons , Diseases 
Commons , Medical E ducation Commons , and the Mental and Social Health Commons 
Recommended Citation Recommended Citation 
Czajkowski SM, P owell LH, Adler N, Naar-King S, Re ynolds KD , Hunter C, Lar aia B, Olster D , Perna F , 
Peterson J, Epel E, Bo yingt on J, Charlson M. The ORBI T model for de veloping beha vioral treatments t o 
prevent or manage chr onic diseases: A fr amework for tr anslating ideas int o inter ventions. Health 
Psychology , online first publication F ebruar y 2, 2015 
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the CGU F aculty Scholarship at Scholarship @ Clar emont. 
It has been accepted for inclusion in CGU F aculty Publications and Resear ch b y an authoriz ed administr ator of 
Scholarship @ Clar emont. F or mor e information, please contact scholarship@cuc.clar emont.edu . 
Authors Authors 
Susan M. Czajkowski, L ynda H. P owell, Nancy Adler , Sylvie Naar-King, Kim D . Reynolds, Christine M. 
Hunter , Barbar a Lar aia, Debor ah H. Olster , Frank M. P erna, Jane y C. P eterson, Elissa Epel, Josephine E. 
Boyingt on, and Mar y Charlson 
This ar ticle is a vailable at Scholarship @ Clar emont: https:/ /scholarship.clar emont.edu/cgu_fac_pub/989 
See discussions, st ats, and author pr ofiles f or this public ation at : https://www .researchgate.ne t/public ation/271773247
From Ideas to Efﬁcacy: The ORBIT Model for Developing Beha vioral
Treatments for Chronic Diseases
Article    in  Health P sycholog y · Februar y 2015
DOI: 10.1037/he a0000161  · Sour ce: PubMed
CITATIONS
500READS
2,540
13 author s, including:
Some o f the author s of this public ation ar e also w orking on these r elat ed pr ojects:
National Gr owth and He alth St udy View pr oject
SEED: Str ess, Eating, and Early De velopment  View pr oject
Susan M Cz ajkowski
National Canc er Instit ute (U SA)
91 PUBLICA TIONS    9,992  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Lynda P owell
Rush Univ ersity Medic al Cent er
217 PUBLICA TIONS    15,044  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Nanc y Adler
Univ ersity of Calif ornia, San F rancisc o
447 PUBLICA TIONS    41,622  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
Barb ara Lar aia
Univ ersity of Calif ornia, Berk eley
155 PUBLICA TIONS    9,164  CITATIONS    
SEE PROFILE
All c ontent f ollo wing this p age was uplo aded b y Frank M P erna  on 12 No vember 2015.
The user has r equest ed enhanc ement of the do wnlo aded file.
From Ideas to Efficacy: The ORBIT Model for Developing Behavioral
Treatments for Chronic Diseases
Susan M. Czajkowski/H11569
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MarylandLynda H. Powell/H11569
Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois
Nancy Adler
University of California, San FranciscoSylvie Naar-King
Wayne State University
Kim D. Reynolds
Claremont Graduate UniversityChristine M. Hunter
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
Barbara Laraia
University of California, BerkeleyDeborah H. Olster
Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
Frank M. Perna
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MarylandJaney C. Peterson
Weill Cornell Medical College
Elissa Epel
University of California, San FranciscoJosephine E. Boyington
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
Mary E. Charlson
Weill Cornell Medical Collegefor the Obesity Related Behavioral
Intervention Trials (ORBIT) Consortium1
This article was published Online First February 2, 2015.
/H11569The first (Susan M. Czajkowski) and the second (Lynda H. Powell)
authors shared leadership in the development and writing of this article.
Susan M. Czajkowski, Clinical Applications and Prevention Branch,
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and BloodInstitute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; Lynda H.Powell, Department of Preventive Medicine, Rush University MedicalCenter, Chicago, Illinois; Nancy Adler, Departments of Psychiatry andPediatrics, Center for Health and Community, University of California, SanFrancisco; Sylvie Naar-King, Pediatric Prevention Research Center,Wayne State University; Kim D. Reynolds, School of Community andGlobal Health, Claremont Graduate University; Christine M. Hunter, Di-vision of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolic Diseases, National In-stitute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutesof Health; Barbara Laraia, Division of Community Health and HumanDevelopment, School of Public Health, University of California, Berkeley;Deborah H. Olster, Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research,Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health; Frank M. Perna,Behavioral Research Program, National Cancer Institute, National Insti-tutes of Health; Janey C. Peterson, Center for Integrative Medicine, WeillCornell Medical College; Elissa Epel, Department of Psychiatry, Center forHealth and Community, University of California, San Francisco; JosephineE. Boyington, Clinical Applications and Prevention Branch, Division of
Cardiovascular Sciences, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, NationalInstitutes of Health; Mary E. Charlson, Center for Integrative Medicine, WeillCornell Medical College; for the Obesity Related Behavioral InterventionTrials (ORBIT) Consortium.
Deborah H. Olster is currently at the Directorate for Social, Behavioral
& Economic Sciences, National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia.The Obesity-Related Behavioral Intervention Trials (ORBIT) consor-
tium, consisting of seven research projects and a Resource and Coordina-tion Unit (RCU), was supported by cooperative agreement grants from the
National Institutes of Health. In particular, the National Heart, Lung, andBlood Institute funded Grants #U01 HL097843, #U01 HL097894, and#U01 HL097973. The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute and theEunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and HumanDevelopment together cofunded Grants #U01 HL097889 and #U01HL097839. The National Cancer Institute funded Grant #U01 CA150387.The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseasesfunded Grant #U01 DK088380. The NIH Office of Behavioral and SocialSciences Research funded the RCU at Northwestern University to facilitatecollaboration across the seven funded research projects. Preparation of thisarticle was also supported by the National Institute on Aging, the AmericanFederation for Aging Research, the John A. Hartford Foundation, and theAtlantic Philanthropies under Grant #K23AG042869. The authors wouldlike to acknowledge key feedback and suggestions made by Peter Kauf-mann, Rena Wing, and Leonard Epstein during earlier phases of thisarticle’s development. The views expressed in this article are those of theauthors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Institutes ofHealth (NIH) or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Susan M.
Czajkowski, MSC 7936, 6701 Rockledge Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892-7936. E-mail: czajkows@mail.nih.gov
1See Appendix (in online supplemental materials) for a list of ORBIT
Project Personnel.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Health Psychology © 2015 American Psychological Association
2015, Vol. 34, No. 10, 971–982 0278-6133/15/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000161
971
Objective: Given the critical role of behavior in preventing and treating chronic diseases, it is important
to accelerate the development of behavioral treatments that can improve chronic disease prevention andoutcomes. Findings from basic behavioral and social sciences research hold great promise for addressingbehaviorally based clinical health problems, yet there is currently no established pathway for translatingfundamental behavioral science discoveries into health-related treatments ready for Phase III efficacy
testing. This article provides a systematic framework for developing behavioral treatments for preventingand treating chronic diseases. Method: The Obesity-Related Behavioral Intervention Trials (ORBIT)
model for behavioral treatment development features a flexible and progressive process, prespecifiedclinically significant milestones for forward movement, and return to earlier stages for refinement andoptimization. Results: This article presents the background and rationale for the ORBIT model, a
summary of key questions for each phase, a selection of study designs and methodologies well-suited toanswering these questions, and prespecified milestones for forward or backward movement acrossphases. Conclusions: The ORBIT model provides a progressive, clinically relevant approach to increas-
ing the number of evidence-based behavioral treatments available to prevent and treat chronic diseases.
Keywords: health behavior, behavioral treatment development, translation of basic behavioral research
into behavioral treatments, behavioral study designs and methods, prevention and management of chronicdisease, lifestyle
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000161.supp
It is widely acknowledged that behavior plays a central role in
the prevention and management of chronic disease. An estimated40% of premature deaths are attributable to preventable behavioralfactors such as smoking, unhealthy dietary intake, and sedentarylifestyle ( Mokdad, Marks, Stroup, & Gerberding, 2004 ;Schroeder,
2007 ), all of which have been linked to major chronic illnesses
such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes ( Chakravarty
et al., 2012 ;Yoon, Bastian, Anderson, Collins, Jaffe, & CDC,
2014 ). Unhealthy lifestyles adversely affect health and well-being
and increase the cost of health care, an increasingly importantconsideration given the aging of the U.S. population. Chronicdiseases currently account for 85% of health care spending ( An-
derson, 2010 ), and the number of Americans who have at least one
chronic disease is expected to rise from 145 million in 2009 to 157million by 2020 ( Anderson, 2010 ).
Engaging in health-promoting behaviors can reduce or delay the
onset of chronic disease and disability ( Akesson, Larsson, Discac-
ciati, & Wolk, 2014 ;Mozaffarian, 2014 ;Paganini-Hill, Kawas, &
Corrada, 2011 ). Treatments that encourage healthy lifestyle behav-
iors, grounded in fundamental behavioral research and developedincrementally over time, have proven highly effective in reducingsuch clinically important outcomes as weight, blood pressure,cholesterol levels, and incidence of diabetes ( Appel et al., 2003 ;
Appel et al., 2011 ;Epstein, Paluch, Roemmich, & Beecher, 2007 ;
Knowler et al., 2002 ;Wadden et al., 2011 ). Given the potential for
evidence-based behavioral treatments to address many of thecostly health problems facing an aging population, acceleratingtheir development and optimization is a public health priority.
Translation I research in which “bench” findings are applied to
the “bedside” is uncommon in the behavioral arena. Advances inunderstanding fundamental human processes such as motivation,emotion, cognition, self-regulation, decision-making, stress, andsocial networks are not being optimally applied to pressing behav-ioral health problems. Promising behavioral treatments “in thepipeline” are often abandoned, rather than refined, if they fail earlytests. In some cases, treatments that achieve success in early
studies are not pushed toward rigorous testing in Phase III efficacy
trials, while others are tested in Phase III trials prematurely,without undergoing adequate development and refinement in early
phase studies. This contrasts with the biomedical arena whichbenefits from industry support for early translational research andhas a well-defined process for developing a new drug or device,starting with basic science research and progressing to the FDA-required Phase III efficacy trial.
In light of the importance of behavioral treatment development,
the National Institutes of Health Office of Behavioral and SocialSciences Research (OBSSR), in collaboration with the NationalHeart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI), the National CancerInstitute (NCI), the National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive andKidney Diseases (NIDDK), the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National
Institute of Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), andinvestigators from the Obesity-Related Behavioral InterventionTrials (ORBIT) consortium organized a cross-disciplinary confer-ence of experts in fields related to the development and earlytesting of behavioral health-related treatments. An importantgoal of this conference was to propose guidelines for develop-ing behavioral treatments to prevent or manage chronic dis-eases, proceeding from the identification of innovative ap-proaches to solving important clinical problems based on basicbehavioral science theory and research, to the design and pre-liminary testing of promising treatments, through readiness toconduct a Phase III efficacy trial. Conference participants in-
cluded members of the ORBIT consortium, all of whom arecurrently developing obesity treatments, NIH program officers,and experts in the discoveries, designs, methodologies, andinfrastructures needed to develop and test innovative, health-related behavioral treatments (conference information can befound at http://www.nihorbit.org/ORBIT%20Content/Worksho
ps%20and%20Conferences.aspx?PageView /H11005Shared ).
This article presents the ORBIT model for developing behav-
ioral treatments to prevent and/or manage chronic disease. Themodel was informed by the process of drug development and byprevious efforts to define the behavioral treatment developmentprocess. It reflects a comprehensive synthesis of the recommen-
dations made by workshop participants as further refined by NIHcollaborators and ORBIT consortium members.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.972 CZAJKOWSKI ET AL.
The Process of Drug Development
The development of a new drug is guided by regulatory require-
ments and typically sponsored by industry ( Friedman, Furberg, &
DeMets, 1998 ;Lipsky & Sharp, 2001 ). It begins with preclinical
basic science studies in animal or in vitro models to understand thedisease process. Phase I andIIstudies turn to humans and focus on
small numbers of highly selected subjects. Phase I “dose-finding”
studies determine the maximally tolerated dose of a candidatedrug, and Phase II studies determine the impact of this maximally
tolerated dose on significant biologic activity. If the drug hasminimal biologic impact, it is reexamined in Phase I and/or pre-
clinical studies or abandoned. If the drug has the expected impact,a pilot study is often conducted to determine the feasibility andacceptability of a trial protocol in preparation for the Phase III
efficacy trial, where the drug’s impact on clinically meaningfulendpoints such as disease onset, progression and mortality isevaluated ( Friedman et al., 1998 ;Lipsky & Sharp, 2001 ). Dem-
onstration of benefit of the drug on clinically significant outcomesinPhase III efficacy trials is key to Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approval and introduction of the drug into the commercialmarket.
Previous Efforts to Define a Process for Behavioral
Treatment Development
Because the development of behavioral treatments that target
physical health outcomes has not been regulated by any govern-mental agency, it has not been guided by any widely recognized
and agreed-upon process. A number of prior efforts describingbehavioral treatment development include: Green’s (1974)
PRECEDE/PROCEED model for health program planning; Green-
wald and Cullen’s (1985) 5-phase cancer control model; Flay’s
(1986) 8-stage health promotion model; the National Institute of
Drug Abuse’s (NIDA) Stage Model ( Carroll & Onken, 2005 ;
Rounsaville, Carroll, & Onken, 2001 ); the EVOLVE mixed-
methods model ( Peterson et al., 2013 ); the Medical Research
Council’s framework for complex interventions ( Craig et al.,
2008a ,2008b ); and Intervention Mapping ( Bartholomew, Parcel,
Kok, Gottlieb, & Fernandez, 2011 ).
The ORBIT model, first introduced in several recent NIH ini-
tiatives ( National Heart, Lung, & Blood Institute, 2008 ;Office ofBehavioral & Social Sciences Research, 2010 ), differs from many
of these earlier approaches in several ways. First, it focuses ex-clusively on the early, pre-efficacy phases of behavioral treatment
development. This makes it possible to integrate the ORBITframework with those frameworks that outline steps beyond thepre-efficacy phase (e.g., NIDA’s Stage Model, the MRC model, orIntervention Mapping). Second, it was developed for use with abroad array of chronic diseases, unlike some of the earlier models
which were developed for specific disorders such as cancer, drugabuse, or mental illness. Third, it intentionally uses terminology
from the drug development model to enhance comprehension by
medical gatekeepers who most commonly manage chronic dis-eases with drug therapy.
The ORBIT Model For Behavioral
Treatment Development
Overview
Figure 1 presents the ORBIT model. Critical features include a
flexible and iterative progressive process, prespecified clinicallysignificant milestones for forward movement, and return to anearlier phase for refinement in the event of suboptimal results.Although its primary focus is on pre-efficacy development andtesting, later phases of research are included to show that optimi-zation of treatments can occur even for those that have reached theefficacy or effectiveness stage. Table 1 presents a summary of key
questions of relevance for each phase, a selection of designs andmethodologies that are well-suited to answering these questions,and prespecified milestones for forward or backward movementacross phases.
Identification of a Significant Clinical Question
Coller (2008) has observed that one of the key skills necessary
for a successful translational effort is the ability to articulate ahealth need or clinical question requiring a solution “with theprecision of a basic science hypothesis.” Thus, the process ofbehavioral treatment development is informed by the identificationof a clinical question or problem for which a behavioral treatmentcould provide a solution. For example, the clinical problem could
Figure 1. The ORBIT model for behavioral treatment development.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.973 ORBIT MODEL FOR DEVELOPING BEHAVIORAL TREATMENTS
Table 1
Goals, Methods, Spirit of Inquiry, and Milestones, by Phase, in the ORBIT Model
Phase Central goal Specific goals Common methods Spirit of inquiry Milestone
Phase Ia:
DefineDefine basic
elementsDevelop hypothesized pathway by which
behavioral treatment can solve animportant clinical problem
Provide scientific basis for behavioral
milestones
Provide basic behavioral/social science
basis for treatment components andtheir respective treatment targets
Identify appropriate subjectsAssess safety, tolerability, acceptabilityReview of clinical guidelines, meta-analyses,
clinical trials, basic behavioral/socialscience findings, epidemiologic studies
ExperimentsTime SeriesABA designsN-of-1 trialsEcological observational studiesFormative qualitative research:—focus groups—interviewsEvidentiary studiesCreativity
DiscoveryFlexibilityExperimentationHypothesis formulationCandidate treatment components,
methods, and milestones aredefined
Phase Ib:
RefineRefine for strength
and efficiencyIdentify independent and interactive
treatment components
Determine needed dose/durationDetermine mode of deliveryDetermine need for tailoring for:—special populations—treatment responseIf needed, optimize treatment using basic
behavioral/social science findings
Assess safety, tolerability, acceptabilityFactorial/fractional factorial designs
Adaptive designsExperimentsTime seriesSingle case designsCase seriesAdaptive treatmentsFormative qualitative research:—focus groups—interviewsSignal detection methodsEfficiency
TailoringClinical relevanceSensitivity to patientOptimizationFlexibilitySatisfaction that the treatment
package is complete and thefixed protocol is ready fortesting
Phase IIa:
Proof-of-conceptClinically significant
signalPrepare the Treatment Manual and
procedures for fidelity monitoringQuasi-experimental, treatment-only design Initial test of a fixed
protocolA clinically significant impact
on the behavioral target
Determine whether the treatment can
achieve a clinically significant signalon the behavioral risk factor
Phase IIb:
Pilot testingClinically significant
signal over noiseReplication of clinically significant
signal in treated group
Clinically significant signal over noiseAdequacy of control group:—minimal change in behavioral risk
factor
—minimal dropouts and crossovers—credible and acceptableRandomized designs Randomized test of a
fixed protocol
Systematic study of
control groupEmpirical support that:
—the intervention has a
clinically significant signalover the control group
—the control group is
appropriateThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.974 CZAJKOWSKI ET AL.
be that there is no current treatment for a specific condition, a
current treatment is not potent or durable enough to change animportant clinical outcome, a current treatment is effective butadherence to it is poor, or a current treatment produces too manyside effects for routine use in clinical practice.
The hypothesis that change in a behavioral risk factor could
solve a clinical problem is one of the entry points for behavioraltreatment development (depicted in Figure 1 by the arrow going
from “Significant Clinical Question” to Phase I studies). The
initial explicit identification of the clinical problem does severalthings. It encourages investigators to: (a) set sights on the Phase III
efficacy trial which will test the benefit of the behavioral treatmenton an outcome that is meaningful in clinical practice; (b) considerearly on the primary behavioral, clinical, or biomedical endpointsin that efficacy trial; and (c) commit to achieving a sufficientlypotent level of behavioral change to achieve meaningful change onthe ultimate biomedical or clinical outcome.
Application of Basic Behavioral and Social
Sciences Research
Basic behavioral and social sciences research can foster hypotheses
about the drivers of a behavioral risk factor. Treatment development
would then proceed with the translation of these drivers of behaviorinto treatment targets , an identification of clinical methods by which
these targets can be altered, and the translation of targets into quan-tifiable process measures to assess the success of the treatment. Forexample, basic behavioral science has shown that mobilization ofexecutive function can serve as a “brake” on impulsive eating ( Fa-
gundo et al., 2012 ). Thus, it is reasonable to hypothesize that im-
provement in executive function would reduce impulsive eating.Treatment development would then involve identifying specific ex-ecutive function skills such as planning and problem-solving, design-ing a training program to teach these skills, and developing processmeasures to assess mastery.
The reciprocal connection between basic behavioral and social
sciences research and early phases of behavioral treatment devel-opment is depicted in Figure 1 by bidirectional arrows. Although
a clinical problem can foster a search for relevant basic scienceguidance, basic science discoveries can inspire an application ofthat process to a pressing clinical problem. Various independentbasic science findings can justify inclusion of several candidatetreatment components, each with their own treatment targets,clinical methods, and process measures. Basic science can informthe dose and method of delivery of a behavioral treatment. If atreatment approaches, but does not achieve, clinically significantmilestones, avenues for optimization may also be informed bybasic science findings.
Phase I: Design
The goal of Phase I is to design the essential features of a
behavioral treatment or to adapt an existing treatment to a newproblem. The hallmark is that the testing is fluid, permittingongoing adjustments in treatment in response to evolving findings.Although initial tests may be on a small number of highly selectedparticipants, milestones for judging success of the treatment shouldbe ambitious, providing a needed cushion for expected erosion ofeffect in subsequent testing in more diverse samples.Table 1 ( continued )
Phase Central goal Specific goals Common methods Spirit of inquiry Milestone
Phase IIb
(continued):
Feasibility pilot Feasibility of
efficacy trialprotocolPrepare the Manual of Operations for
efficacy trial protocol
Determine logistical feasibility of
efficacy trial protocol for investigatorsand participants
Provide estimates needed for design of
efficacy trial:
—screening to enrollment ratio—dropout/crossover rates—response rates in treated and control
conditionsQualitative and quantitative studies of
feasibility & acceptabilityAcceptability to target
population
Performance across
multiple sites
Preparation for efficacy
trial:
—sample size—length of follow-up—number of sitesEmpirical support that the trial
protocol is logistically feasible
Empirically derived estimates
available for the design of anefficacy trialThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.975 ORBIT MODEL FOR DEVELOPING BEHAVIORAL TREATMENTS
Phase Ia: Define
Purpose and goals. InPhase Ia , the scientific foundation and
the basic elements of the behavioral treatment are defined. Amongthe goals are the development of a hypothesized pathway by whicha behavioral treatment could solve a clinical problem, specificationof clinically significant milestones on the behavioral risk factorbeing targeted, identification of appropriate subjects, definition ofpotential treatment components, and elucidation of basic behav-ioral and social sciences support for potential treatment compo-nents and their respective treatment targets.
Milestones for judging the success of a treatment on the behav-
ioral risk factor are guided by the clinical problem. A priorispecification of these milestones prevents “moving the target”after the data are in. Basing milestones on clinical significanceavoids the problem of erroneously assuming that a treatment ortreatment component is successful if it produces a small benefitthat is statistically significant but not clinically meaningful. Mile-stones can be identified from epidemiological, experimental, orclinical studies which link the behavioral factor to accepted bio-medical risk factors, surrogate markers, subclinical disease, orclinical events. Finding a cutpoint on a behavioral measure wherebiomedical risk increases is suggestive of a level of change in thebehavioral factor that is clinically relevant. This may be an easiertask for established behavioral risk factors such as smoking, alco-hol/drug abuse, diets high in saturated fat or sodium, physicalinactivity, stress, depression, and low social support, all of whichhave an evidence base to support cutpoints for increased risk.However, in the case of novel behavioral risk factors where suchan evidence base may not exist, Phase Ia experimental studies
examining covariation between the behavioral factor and a rele-vant biomedical risk factor would be justified. For example,weight loss of /H113505% in overweight and obese adults with cardio-
vascular disease (CVD) risk factors can be deemed a clinicallysignificant change because it has been shown to result in clinicallymeaningful cardiovascular and metabolic benefits ( Jensen et al.,
2013 ). Were these data not available, Phase Ia experimental stud-
ies examining the covariation between level of weight loss and acardiovascular risk factor, such as blood pressure, would beneeded.
Study designs and methods. A range of designs and methods
are appropriate for Phase Ia studies. Systematic reviews, meta-analyses, and epidemiologic studies can be used to identify clini-cally significant problems, endpoints, milestones, and links be-tween behavioral risk factors and clinical endpoints. Taxonomiesand “mapping” strategies that characterize behavioral interven-tions and their components can help in selecting treatment ele-ments ( Michie, van Stralen, & West, 2011 ;Bartholomew et al.,
2011 ). Experimental and observational studies in the laboratory
and field enable the researcher to identify potential treatmentcomponents and the respective biological, psychophysiological,social, environmental, and behavioral targets needed to accomplishchange in them and, in turn, in the behavioral risk factor. Ethno-graphic observation and interviews, focus groups, and other qual-itative research methods can engage the community of participantsin the development of user-centered strategies and help identifyattitudes, norms, and values that can affect an intervention’s ac-ceptability and feasibililty ( Peterson et al., 2013 ;Strolla, Gans, &
Risica, 2006 ). Observational techniques such as behavioral eventmodeling ( Wansink, 2010 ) and use of ecological momentary as-
sessment ( Shiffman, Stone, & Hufford, 2008 ) permit the study of
behavior in naturalistic settings, leading not only to the identifi-cation of intervention targets but also of critical time points forintervention delivery. Time series and ABA designs, involvingmultiple baseline and treatment observations in small numbers ofindividuals ( Ridenour, Pineo, Molina, & Lich, 2013 ), allow re-
searchers to identify early indications of potential benefit. Newanalytic techniques for use with small samples, including Bayesiananalyses of data from N-of-1 trials, may be useful ( Zucker, Rutha-
zer, & Schmid, 2010 ).Phase Ia studies are consistent with “evi-
dentiary studies” ( Stevens, Taber, Murray, & Ward, 2007 ), a term
used to describe a series of small, inexpensive experiments orobservational studies of the impact of potential treatment compo-nents on process variables.
Milestones. Movement to Phase Ib is warranted once the
hypothesized pathway by which the proposed treatment translatesinto benefit on the behavioral risk factor is formulated, potentialcandidates for treatment components have been assembled, inter-vention targets for each component have been delineated, andmilestones for determining clinically significant change on thebehavioral risk factor have been defined.
Phase Ib: Refine
Purpose and goals. The goal of Phase Ib is to refine the
treatment to promote efficiency while at the same time retainingsufficient strength to promote clinically significant change. Can-didate components are examined together for the first time, andthose that are essential and show independent effects on thebehavioral risk factor are identified. The impact of serial presen-tation of independent components might be studied. Practicalaspects of the intervention such as mode of delivery, agent ofdelivery, frequency of contact, and duration of contacts are studiedto identify the most efficient ways to achieve clinical targets. Incases of variable response to a single protocol, the development ofadaptive treatments with tailoring for special population subgroupsor for differential response to treatment could be considered. Phase
Ibstudies are ideally suited to the adaptation of an existing
treatment to new conditions, such as a new patient population,setting or context, or mode of delivery.
Study designs and methods. Factorial and fractional factorial
designs ( Chakraborty, Collins, Strecher, & Murphy, 2009 ) are
ideal for determining independent treatment components or com-binations of components, optimum methods of delivery, and opti-mum doses of treatment. Small single case or case series studiescan be used to evaluate dose, safety, tolerability, and impact ofintroduction of new treatment components ( Dallery & Raiff, 2014 ;
Kazdin, 1982 ). Adaptive designs provide the methodology for
determining the impact of serial introduction of multiple treatmentcomponents ( Lei, Nahum-Shani, Lynch, Oslin, & Murphy, 2012 ).
Modeling techniques derived from engineering and control sys-tems theory can simulate intervention effects within complexsystems to determine how to achieve maximum benefit ( Navarro-
Barrientos, Rivera, & Collins, 2011 ). Analytic procedures drawn
from engineering can quantify the patterns of treatment effectsover time to determine the appropriate timing for evaluating itseffects on a behavioral risk factor ( Navarro-Barrientos, Rivera, &
Collins, 2011 ). An adaptive treatment, rather than a “one size fitsThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.976 CZAJKOWSKI ET AL.
all” treatment, could be developed to feature tailoring based upon
prespecified decision rules for participant characteristics or re-sponse to treatment ( Lei, Nahum-Shani, Lynch, Oslin, & Murphy,
2012 ). Signal detection methods can be useful for identification of
subgroups for which tailoring of treatment could optimize theiroutcomes ( Palmer & Hadley, 2005 ). Qualitative methods evaluate
acceptability to the target population and help refine the contentand delivery of the treatment package ( Strolla, Gans, & Risica,
2006 ).
Milestones. The essential milestone for moving to Phase II is
the confidence of the investigator that the treatment package iscomplete, includes essential components offered in an efficientway, is safe and acceptable to the population of interest, andpromises to have a clinically significant benefit on the behavioralrisk factor. Evidence of these achievements signals that the com-pleted treatment protocol is ready to undergo a “proof-of-concept”test.
Phase II: Preliminary Testing
The goal of Phase II studies is to test the ability of a fixed
treatment package to produce a clinically significant improvementon a behavioral risk factor. The hallmark of Phase II studies is that
the treatment protocol is fixed and clearly articulated in a treatmentmanual. Two types of testing can be conducted, often serially. Apreliminary, proof-of-concept test is a cost-effective way to deter-mine ifa treatment package can achieve benefit on a clinically
significant target in a small, select sample. If it does, it justifiesgoing forward with more rigorous and costly pilot testing using arandomized design and larger, more representative samples. Se-quential testing, beginning with a small proof-of-concept test,avoids wasting the resources needed for a more ambitious random-ized design on a treatment that cannot hit clinically significanttargets under optimum conditions.
Phase IIa: Proof-of-Concept
Purpose and goals. The main goal of the proof-of-concept
study is to determine, in an efficient way, whether or not thetreatment merits more rigorous and costly testing using a random-ized design. This is done by determining if the treatment packagethat emerges from Phase I studies can produce a clinically signif-
icant improvement on the behavioral risk factor under ideal con-ditions. Because the protocol is fixed, a Treatment Manual can bewritten that promotes quality assurance, including materials fortraining, ongoing supervision, and fidelity monitoring of interven-tionists.
Study designs and methods. Quasi-experimental, within-
subjects designs where subjects act as their own controls in apre-post comparison are ideal. The sample size can be smallbecause clinical, not statistical, benefit is sought and sample sizecalculations are unnecessary. The sample can be selected fromaccessible subjects, rather than be representative, because thisinitial test will determine only whether the treatment merits morerigorous testing. The focus of Phase IIa studies is deliberately
placed on the treatment and its ability to produce clinically signif-icant change on a behavioral risk factor. This is in contrast toPhase IIb concerns with determining the source of a treatment
effect (e.g., separation of treatment effects from effects due to thepassage of time) and with choosing the appropriate control group,
in itself a complex undertaking ( Mohr et al., 2009 ).
Milestones. The essential milestone for moving to Phase IIb
is that the treatment achieved a clinically significant change on thebehavioral risk factor. If an ambitious clinical criterion was ap-proached, but not achieved, optimization using qualitative inquirycould justify forward movement to Phase IIb. If the clinical
criterion was not even approached, the researchers could return toPhase I studies or decide if there is justification to abandon the
treatment.
Phase IIb: Pilot Testing
Purpose and goals. Pilot studies have a variety of purposes
and can take many forms, but the proposed model includes twogeneral types: pilot studies and feasibility pilot studies. Pilot stud-ies are natural follow-ups to a positive proof-of-concept study.Their main goal is to determine whether a clinically significantbenefit on the behavioral risk factor can be achieved in a larger,more representative sample and whether this benefit is above andbeyond the passage of time, nonspecific attention, or other treat-ment options. There are many choices for a control group, rangingfrom a less stringent usual care control to a more stringent atten-tion control ( Freedland, Mohr, Davidson, & Schwartz, 2011 ;Krae-
mer, Mintz, Noda, Tinklenberg, & Yesavage, 2006 ). At minimum,
all controlled designs control for the passage of time by determin-ing whether the subject would have achieved benefit over timewithout treatment. The specific choice of the type of control shouldbe based upon the clinical question of interest. For example, somequestions focus on the treatment and determine whether or not itcan do better than nonspecific attention. Other questions focus onthe outcome and determine whether or not the new treatment cando better than usual care, or as well as an existing treatment butwith less burden and cost ( Freedland et al., 2011 ). Once the
decision about the appropriate control is made, systematic study ofthe control group’s properties is needed ( Mohr et al., 2009 ).Phase
IIbis an ideal time to study the control group’s credibility, dropout
rate, and influence on the behavioral risk factor.
Feasibility pilot studies serve as preparation for the Phase III
efficacy trial. Their key purpose is to assess the feasibility of thetrial protocol and provide estimates needed to design the efficacytrial. Is the trial protocol feasible and acceptable to the investiga-tors and to the participants? Is there differential drop-out from therandomized arms? What is the screening to enrollment ratiosoverall and at each of the recruiting sites? Although a feasibilitypilot study produces an unstable estimate of the effect size on theprimary endpoint of the Phase III efficacy trial ( Kraemer et al.,
2006 ), the effect size should be assessed and considered along with
accumulated effect sizes from similar past trials to determine thesample size needed for the efficacy trial.
Study designs and methods. Most types of pilot studies use
a randomized design. Systematic evaluation of a variety of controlgroups can proceed using fractional factorial designs. Feasibilitypilot studies draw on qualitative methods, such as focus groups andethnographic interviews, to assess participant and staff acceptanceof, and preference for, all aspects of the protocol including meth-ods and measures, treatment and control conditions and proce-dures, and quality assurance protocols. Findings can facilitateThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.977 ORBIT MODEL FOR DEVELOPING BEHAVIORAL TREATMENTS
protocol refinement and simplification in light of direct experi-
ence.
Milestones. Phase IIb data showing that a behavioral treat-
ment produces a clinically significant signal on the behavioral riskfactor in patients with the specified clinical problem—although thechosen control does not—supports moving to a Phase III efficacy
trial. Empirical support for the feasibility of the trial protocolincludes a conservative and feasible recruitment plan, an estimateof drop-out rates from both treated and control conditions, and anestimate of the probable range of effect from treated and controlconditions that will be attained on the proposed primary clinicalendpoint in the efficacy trial.
Application of the ORBIT Model
The ORBIT model proposes a set of studies forming a chain of
evidence that signals readiness for an efficacy trial. This chain ofevidence can be translated into a pathway by which the treatmentis hypothesized to work (see Figure 2 ). The link between A and B
demonstrates that the treatment has fidelity; it can produce changeon its intended behavioral, social, or environmental targets. Thelink between A and C shows that the treatment is powerful enoughto produce clinically significant improvement in the behavioralrisk factor of interest. A fully powered determination of the causallinks between A and D or E would occur in an eventual efficacytrial.
The value of articulating a hypothesized pathway, and collecting
measurements for each of its links, lies in the ability to moreprecisely interpret the results of Phase III trials ( Powell et al.,
2008 ). If the trial produces positive results, evidence specifically
supporting each link of the chain strengthens the assertion that theobserved effects were due to hypothesized pathways. Evidence
collected for each link of the chain in negative trials can helpdetermine whether null findings were due to a failure of the
hypothesis that change in the behavioral risk factor is causally
related to change in the biomedical outcome or a failure of the
treatment to affect its targets.
Use of the ORBIT model is illustrated by applying it to the
development of a technology-assisted behavioral treatment to pre-vent diabetes in insulin resistant patients, justified by clinicalguidelines indicating that lifestyle change is the first step in treat-ment ( Handelsman et al., 2011 ). The scenario below shows how
the model could be implemented to develop and test such anintervention.
Using the ORBIT model, a Phase Ia review of epidemiological
studies and clinical trials provides empirical support for the clin-ical significance of a 30% reduction in diabetes over standard drugtreatment ( Hamman et al., 2006 ), a 5% weight loss as a biomedical
target ( Hamman et al., 2006 ), a dietary change of 5% reduction in
percent fat, and an increase in physical activity to 150 min/week ofmoderately vigorous physical activity ( Hamman et al., 2006 ).Phase Ia investigation of basic science studies shows both theo-
retical and empirical support for the value of daily self-monitoringon reducing fat in the diet and increasing physical activity.
APhase Ia test of daily self-monitoring in a small Ntime series
of selected patients shows that patients will self-monitor both theirdietary intake and their physical activity, as evidenced by theirwillingness to transmit data from daily food diaries and acceler-ometers. Although the goals of a 5% reduction in fat and physicalactivity target of 150 min/week are achieved, they are not sus-tained over time. Based on further review of basic science studiessuggesting that tailored feedback potentiates the effects of self-monitoring, Internet-delivered tailored feedback is added to thePhase Ia small Ntime series study and receipt of the feedback is
measured by frequency of patient log-ins. With this addition,sustained achievement of the diet and physical activity milestonesis obtained.
A subsequent Phase Ib fractional factorial study determines that
daily self-monitoring and tailored feedback together are morepotent than is either one alone in achieving the 5% weight loss(biomedical) target. The combined findings suggest that a treat-ment with two components is needed and the effects are robustenough to move to Phase II studies, at which point a Treatment
Manual would be written and a treatment-only “proof-of-concept”study is run on a small number of accessible patients. If the dietary,physical activity and weight loss milestones are achieved, thisjustifies a more robust pilot test in a larger, more diverse sample ofpatients using a randomized design. Such a series of studies makeit possible to articulate the hypothesized pathway by which theproposed treatment may improve the biomedical or clinical out-come (see Figure 3 ).
All of the studies presented in this illustration could be con-
ducted by a single investigator, by a single team of investigators,or by a group of investigators who are, at best, loosely connected.An assumption of the ORBIT model is that research efficiency andquality are enhanced when a multi-disciplinary collaborative teamof investigators works to integrate diverse studies into a chain ofevidence that justifies a Phase III efficacy trial.
Summary and Conclusions
Given the vital role of behavior change in delaying or mitigating
the effects of costly chronic diseases, effective and durable behav-ioral treatments are urgently needed. The ORBIT model wasdeveloped to identify the most productive ways to accomplish this.It provides guidance on the process of treatment development, but
does not propose any specific content . It suggests that use of a
progressive, transdisciplinary framework to facilitate the transla-tion of basic behavioral science findings to clinical application willstrengthen behavioral treatments, encourage their testing in rigor-ous efficacy and effectiveness trials, enhance success, and fosterdissemination into clinical practice.
Figure 2. Model of pathway by which a behavioral treatment is hypothesized to improve a clinical outcome
(CS/H9004/H11005 clinically significant change). See the online article for the color version of this figure.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.978 CZAJKOWSKI ET AL.
Currently, all of the elements needed to go from ideas to the
efficacy trial exist, but the pathway for doing so is not well-defined. Without the early discovery and innovation that is char-acteristic of basic science, the potential for behavioral treatmentsto be robust enough to produce clinically significant results isundercut. Without a progressive approach to treatment develop-ment that embraces a variety of designs and methods, there is a riskthat promising treatments will be abandoned prematurely becausethey fail tests that are too stringent for an evolving understandingof their fundamental elements. Without input from clinical prac-tice, treatments that are judged to be successful because theyachieve statistical significance may produce results that are toosmall to be clinically meaningful. Without a consistent frameworkto encourage progression toward the behavioral efficacy trial, theability of behavioral and social science researchers to provide thetype of evidence that is meaningful to clinical gatekeepers andthird-party payers is compromised.
The ORBIT model stitches together these existing crucial ele-
ments in the behavioral sciences in several ways. First, it pushesbehavioral and clinical investigators to set sights on the efficacytrial, identifies the chain of evidence needed to support such a trial,and outlines the careful, progressive program of research that canprovide this evidence.
Second, the ORBIT model encourages a transdisciplinary ap-
proach. Crosstalk between basic and applied behavioral and socialscientists can foster innovative approaches to common problems,such as novel methods for motivating patients to stick with earlychanges, sustaining change by mobilizing social networks, ormaximizing executive function as a way to minimize impulsivity.Crosstalk between clinicians in medical practice and applied be-havioral scientists can increase the significance of the questionsposed and identify targets that have meaning in clinical practice.Such crosstalk can facilitate the evaluation of a behavioral treat-ment’s viability as an alternative or adjunctive treatment, its side-effect profile, its effects on quality of life, and its potential cost-effectiveness relative to existing treatments.
Third, the ORBIT model advocates for flexibility in both the
designs and methodologies used for treatment development. In theearly phases, it encourages investigators to draw on clinical acu-men and creativity to “tweak” treatments in response to ongoingresults as treatments unfold. This type of work can and should beclearly separated from the testing of fixed protocols. Currently,
most behavioral treatments are tested in the same way usingrandomized designs with attention control groups, fixed protocols,and blinding to outcomes until follow-up is complete. There is astrong rationale for such methods, but when used universally,particularly in the early phases of treatment development, their usecan undercut creativity, impede discovery, and produce weaktreatments.
Fourth, the ORBIT model provides a language for conveying the
significance of a small, single study. Small, early phase studies runthe risk of being judged to be not very important. However, if theyare conceptualized as crucial steps in a program of research that isdirected toward efficacy and effectiveness trials to answer pressingclinical problems, their value becomes more apparent, particularlyto reviewers of grant proposals and papers.
There are several things that the ORBIT model is not. First, it is
not prescriptive or restrictive. Rather, it identifies a flexible strat-egy for collecting a chain of evidence to enhance confidence thata promising behavioral treatment is ready for Phase III testing. The
entire series of studies in the model could be conducted by a singleinvestigator, a team, or, to save money and time, by integratingfindings from multiple but unrelated investigators. By analogy, tobuild a house one could do everything alone or could serve in therole of an architect who creates the design but relies upon a teamfor construction, painting, plumbing, and electricity.
Second, the ORBIT model does not require that treatment de-
velopment proceed precisely as specified in the framework, start-ing with Phase Ia and ending with Phase IIb. In many cases, a
behavioral treatment already exists and the task is simply to adaptit to a new clinical problem, a new patient population, and/or a newoutcome. In this case, the model could be used to decide whatadditional testing is needed. A small proof-of-concept study in anew patient population may show, for example, that results are
promising but suboptimal, suggesting moving back to Phase Ib for
refinement that could optimize results. In other cases, a newbehavioral treatment may be so innovative and compelling thatdevelopment is unnecessary and immediate testing in a feasibilitypilot is warranted. The value of the ORBIT model lies in theprovision of a framework that can facilitate decision-making inlight of various situations and outcomes.
Figure 3. Illustration of a pathway by which a weight loss treatment is hypothesized to reduce diabetes (CS /H9004/H11005
clinically significant change). See the online article for the color version of this figure.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.979 ORBIT MODEL FOR DEVELOPING BEHAVIORAL TREATMENTS
Third, the ORBIT model does not require evidence to be ac-
crued for each “link” in the chain. For example, where well-established evidence exists linking a behavioral risk factor to aclinical outcome (e.g., evidence of an association between smok-ing and heart or lung disease), evidence from an efficacy trial thata behavioral treatment affects that behavioral risk factor (e.g.,smoking) may be sufficient to influence clinical practice. In othercases, evidence of an intervention’s effect on a treatment target
may be adequate for proceeding to a clinical endpoint trial withoutevidence of the intervention’s effect on a behavioral risk factor .
An example is the use of biofeedback to treat chronic pain.Research using fMRI has shown that biofeedback can directly alterneural activity in specific brain regions and these changes canaffect chronic clinical pain ( deCharms et al., 2005 ). Here, one
could move from evidence of an effect on the treatment target of
brain activity (B) to a test of the efficacy of biofeedback on aclinical outcome (severity of pain) without evidence of the treat-
ment’s effect on an intervening behavioral risk factor (C).
Fourth, the ORBIT model does not require mechanisms and
moderators to be included in all phases of behavioral treatmentdevelopment. Although understanding the mechanisms throughwhich an intervention produces its effects can be useful in devel-oping better-targeted interventions, it is not critical to understandmechanisms of action in order to demonstrate an intervention’seffectiveness ( Blumenthal et al., 2002 ). In the ORBIT model,
physiological mechanisms by which the behavioral risk factortranslates into biomedical risk (referred to as biologic plausibilityin epidemiology) can be focused on in early Phase Ia studies to
help justify the choice of a behavioral risk factor and its cutpointfor clinical significance. Moreover, moderators (also called a priorisubgroups in clinical trial methodology) can be studied in Phase Ib
with the goal of adapting treatments so they are maximally pow-erful across all patients at risk. This can and should occur beforethe fixed protocol is tested in Phase II.
In summary, the ORBIT model is a systematic framework for
guiding efforts to link behavioral solutions to clinical problems.Discoveries in the basic behavioral and social sciences holdgreat promise for addressing clinical health problems, yet thereis no commonly established way to translate these findings intobehavioral treatments. In the absence of industry support andregulatory guidelines, it is important for the behavioral sciencecommunity to articulate and adopt models of behavioral treat-ment development that can facilitate the application of viablebehavioral solutions to pressing health problems. Past modelshave emphasized the value of a systematic, phased approach tobehavioral treatment development, and the recent emergence ofevidence-based behavioral medicine ( Davidson et al., 2002 )
provides clear standards for rigor. The ORBIT model comple-ments and extends these efforts in proposing a systematic,well-defined process by which the investigator can achievethese rigorous standards.
Transparency of milestones for success in later phases of inter-
ventional research has been made possible by the required regis-tration of trials in clinicaltrials.gov. An infrastructure to allowsimilar transparency in the earlier phases of behavioral treatmentdevelopment is needed and perhaps can be facilitated by use of theORBIT framework. Finally, because the ORBIT model focusesexclusively on the early phases of behavioral treatment develop-ment, further evolution of the model to deal with later phases oftranslation is needed to achieve the ultimate goal of improving the
utilization of proven behavioral treatments in clinical and commu-nity settings.
Currently, a window of opportunity exists in which demand is
growing for primary and secondary prevention strategies that canreduce the burden of costly chronic diseases which have behav-ioral causes. This creates the need for a larger pool of effectivebehavioral treatments available for use in clinical care than cur-rently exist. To take advantage of this opportunity, it is essentialthat investigators systematically build the rationale for a behav-ioral efficacy trial, conduct that efficacy trial, and, by so doing,build the evidence base for the value of behavioral treatments inclinical practice using the language of medicine and third-partypayers. Creating a robust evidence base for the value of behavioraltreatments in clinical care has enormous potential to expandchoices for patients, improve quality of care, prevent or delaydisease and disability, and, most urgently, lower health care costsnot only for individual patients but for society as a whole.
References
Akesson, A., Larsson, S. C., Discacciati, A., & Wolk, A. (2014). Low-risk
diet and lifestyle habits in the primary prevention of myocardial infarc-tion in men: A population-based prospective cohort study. Journal of the
American College of Cardiology, 64, 1299–1306.
Anderson, G. (2010). Chronic care: Making the case for ongoing care .
Princeton, NJ: Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Retrieved from www
.rwjf.org/pr/product.jsp?id /H1100550968
Appel, L. J., Champagne, C. M., Harsha, D. W., Cooper, L. S., Obarzanek,
E., Elmer, P. J. ,...Young, D. R., & the Writing Group of the PREMIER
Collaborative Research Group. (2003). Effects of comprehensive life-style modification on blood pressure control: Main results of the PRE-MIER clinical trial. Journal of the American Medical Association, 289,
2083–2093.
Appel, L. J., Clark, J. M., Yeh, H. C., Wang, N. Y., Coughlin, J. W., Daumit,
G . ,... Brancati, F. L. (2011). Comparative effectiveness of weight-loss
interventions in clinical practice. The New England Journal of Medicine, 365,
1959–1968. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa1108660
Bartholomew, L., Parcel, G., Kok, G., Gottlieb, G., & Fernandez, M. E.
(2011). Planning health promotion programs: Intervention mapping .
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Blumenthal, J. A., Babyak, M., Wei, J., O’Connor, C., Waugh, R., Eisen-
stein, E. ,... Reed, G. (2002). Usefulness of psychosocial treatment of
mental stress-induced myocardial ischemia in men. The American Jour-
nal of Cardiology, 89, 164–168. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0002-
9149(01)02194-4
Carroll, K. M., & Onken, L. S. (2005). Behavioral therapies for drug abuse.
The American Journal of Psychiatry, 162, 1452–1460. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1176/appi.ajp.162.8.1452
Chakraborty, B., Collins, L. M., Strecher, V. J., & Murphy, S. A. (2009).
Developing multicomponent interventions using fractional factorial de-signs. Statistics in Medicine, 28, 2687–2708. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/
sim.3643
Chakravarty, E. F., Hubert, H. B., Krishnan, E., Bruce, B. B., Lingala,
V. B., & Fries, J. F. (2012). Lifestyle risk factors predict disability anddeath in healthy aging adults. The American Journal of Medicine, 125,
190–197. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.amjmed.2011.08.006
Coller, B. S. (2008). Translational research: Forging a new cultural iden-
tity. The Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine, New York, 75, 478–487.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/msj.20064
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew,
M. (2008a). Developing and evaluating complex interventions: The newThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.980 CZAJKOWSKI ET AL.
Medical Research Council guidance. British Medical Journal, 337,
a1655. http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a1655
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew,
M. (2008b). Developing and evaluating complex interventions: New guidance .
Retrieved from www.mrc.ac.uk/complexinterventionsguidance
Dallery, J., & Raiff, B. R. (2014). Optimizing behavioral health interven-
tions with single-case designs: From development to dissemination.Transitional Behavioral Medicine, 2014, 1–14.
Davidson, K. W., Goldstein, M., Kaplan, R. M., Kaufmann, P. G., Knat-
terud, G. L., Orleans, C. T. ,... Whitlock, E. P. (2003). Evidence-based
behavioral medicine: What is it and how do we achieve it? Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 26, 161–171. http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/
S15324796ABM2603_01
deCharms, R. C., Maeda, F., Glover, G. H., Ludlow, D., Pauly, J. M.,
Soneji, D. ,... Mackey, S. C. (2005). Control over brain activation and
pain learned by using real-time functional MRI. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 102,18626–18631. http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0505210102
Epstein, L. H., Paluch, R. A., Roemmich, J. N., & Beecher, M. D. (2007).
Family-based obesity treatment, then and now: Twenty-five years ofpediatric obesity treatment. Health Psychology, 26, 381–391. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.26.4.381
Fagundo, A. B., de la Torre, R., Jiménez-Murcia, S., Agüera, Z., Granero,
R., Tárrega, S. ,... Fernández-Aranda, F. (2012). Executive functions
profile in extreme eating/weight conditions: From anorexia nervosa toobesity. PLoS ONE, 7, e43382. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone
.0043382
Flay, B. R. (1986). Efficacy and effectiveness trials (and other phases of
research) in the development of health promotion programs. Preventive
Medicine, 15, 451–474. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0091-7435(86)
90024-1
Freedland, K. E., Mohr, D. C., Davidson, K. W., & Schwartz, J. E. (2011).
Usual and unusual care: Existing practice control groups in randomizedcontrolled trials of behavioral interventions. Psychosomatic Medicine,
73,323–335. http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/PSY.0b013e318218e1fb
Friedman, L. M., Furberg, C. D., & DeMets, D. L. (1998). Fundamentals
of Clinical Trials (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Springer-Verlag. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4757-2915-3
Green, L. W. (1974). Toward cost-benefit evaluations of health education:
Some concepts, methods, and examples. Health Education Monographs,
2,34–64.
Greenwald, P., & Cullen, J. W. (1985). The new emphasis in cancer
control. Journal of the National Cancer Institute, 74, 543–551.
Hamman, R. F., Wing, R. R., Edelstein, S. L., Lachin, J. M., Bray, G. A.,
Delahanty, L. ,... Wylie-Rosett, J., & the Diabetes Prevention Program
Research Group. (2006). Effect of weight loss with lifestyle interventionon risk of diabetes. Diabetes Care, 29, 2102–2107. http://dx.doi.org/
10.2337/dc06-0560
Handelsman, Y., Mechanick, J. I., Blonde, L., Grunberger, G., Bloomgar-
den, Z. T., Bray, G. A. ,... Wyne, K. L., & the AACE Task Force for
Developing Diabetes Comprehensive Care Plan. (2011). American As-sociation of Clinical Endocrinologists Medical Guidelines for ClinicalPractice for developing a diabetes mellitus comprehensive care plan.Endocrine Practice, 17 (Suppl 2), 1–53. http://dx.doi.org/10.4158/EP.17
.S2.1
Jensen, M. D., Ryan, D. H., Apovian, C. M., Loria, C. M., Ard, J. D.,
Millen, B. E. ,... Yanovski, S. Z. (2013). 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS
guideline for the management of overweight and obesity in adults.Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 2014, 65.http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2013.11.004
Kazdin, A. (1982). Single-case research designs: Methods for clinical and
applied settings . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. Retrieved
from https://www.amazon.com/Single-Case-Research-Designs-Clinical-
settings/dp/0195030206Knowler, W. C., Barrett-Connor, E., Fowler, S. E., Hamman, R. F., Lachin,
J. M., Walker, E. A., & Nathan, D. M. (2002). Reduction in theincidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. The
New England Journal of Medicine, 346, 393–403. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1056/NEJMoa012512
Kraemer, H. C., Mintz, J., Noda, A., Tinklenberg, J., & Yesavage, J. A.
(2006). Caution regarding the use of pilot studies to guide powercalculations for study proposals. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63,
484–489. http://dx.doi.org/10.1001/archpsyc.63.5.484
Lei, H., Nahum-Shani, I., Lynch, K., Oslin, D., & Murphy, S. A. (2012).
A “SMART” design for building individualized treatment sequences.Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 8, 21–48. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-clinpsy-032511-143152
Lipsky, M. S., & Sharp, L. K. (2001). From idea to market: The drug
approval process. The Journal of the American Board of Family Prac-
tice, 14, 362–367.
Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., & West, R. (2011). The behaviour change
wheel: A new method for characterising and designing behaviour changeinterventions. Implementation Science, 6, 42.http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/
1748-5908-6-42
Mohr, D. C., Spring, B., Freedland, K. E., Beckner, V., Arean, P., Hollon,
S .D . ,... Kaplan, R. (2009). The selection and design of control
conditions for randomized controlled trials of psychological interven-tions. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 78, 275–284. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1159/000228248
Mokdad, A. H., Marks, J. S., Stroup, D. F., & Gerberding, J. L. (2004).
Actual causes of death in the United States, 2000. Journal of the
American Medical Association, 291, 1238–1245. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1001/jama.291.10.1238
Mozaffarian, D. (2014). The promise of lifestyle for cardiovascular health.
Journal of the American College of Cardiology, 64, 1307–1309.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. (2008). Translating basic be-
havioral and social science discoveries into interventions to reduceobesity: Centers for behavioral intervention development (U01) . Re-
trieved from http://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/rfa-files/RFA-HL-08-
013.html
Navarro-Barrientos, J. E., Rivera, D. E., & Collins, L. M. (2011). A
dynamical systems model for understanding behavioral interventionsand body composition change. Mathematical and Computer Modelling
of Dynamical Systems, 17, 183–203. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13873954
.2010.520409
Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research. (2011). Translating
basic behavioral and social science discoveries into interventions toimprove health-related behaviors (R01) . Retrieved from http://grants.
nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-files/PA-11-063.html
Paganini-Hill, A., Kawas, C. H., & Corrada, M. M. (2011). Activities and
mortality in the elderly: The Leisure World cohort study. The Journals
of Gerontology Series A, Biological Sciences and Medical Sciences,66A, 559–567. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/gerona/glq237
Palmer, C. G., & Hadley, D. W. (2005). Evaluating the impact of genetic
counseling and testing with signal detection methods. Journal of Genetic
Counseling, 14, 17–27. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10897-005-1497-4
Peterson, J. C., Czajkowski, S., Charlson, M. E., Link, A. R., Wells, M. T.,
Isen, A. M. ,... Jobe, J. B. (2013). Translating basic behavioral and
social science research to clinical application: The EVOLVE mixedmethods approach. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81,
217–230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0029909
Powell, L. H., Calvin, J. E., Jr., Mendes de Leon, C. F., Richardson, D.,
Grady, K. L., Flynn, K. J. ,... Eaton, C., & the Heart Failure Adherence
and Retention Trial Investigators. (2008). The Heart Failure Adherenceand Retention Trial (HART): Design and rationale. American Heart
Journal, 156, 452–460. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ahj.2008.05.011
Ridenour, T. A., Pineo, T. Z., Maldonado Molina, M. M., & Hassmiller
Lich, K. (2013). Toward rigorous idiographic research in preventionThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.981 ORBIT MODEL FOR DEVELOPING BEHAVIORAL TREATMENTS
science: Comparison between three analytic strategies for testing pre-
ventive intervention in very small samples. Prevention Science, 14,
267–278. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11121-012-0311-4
Rounsaville, B. J., Carroll, K. M., & Onken, L. S. (2001). A stage model
of behavioral therapies research: Getting started and moving on fromStage I. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 133–142. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.8.2.133
Schroeder, S. A. (2007). Shattuck lecture. We can do better—Improving
the health of the American people. The New England Journal of Med-
icine, 357, 1221–1228. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa073350
Shiffman, S., Stone, A. A., & Hufford, M. R. (2008). Ecological momen-
tary assessment. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 4, 1–32. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.clinpsy.3.022806.091415
Stevens, J., Taber, D. R., Murray, D. M., & Ward, D. S. (2007). Advances
and controversies in the design of obesity prevention trials. Obesity, 15,
2163–2170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/oby.2007.257
Strolla, L. O., Gans, K. M., & Risica, P. M. (2006). Using qualitative and
quantitative formative research to develop tailored nutrition interventionmaterials for a diverse low-income audience. Health Education Re-
search, 21, 465–476. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/her/cyh072
Wadden, T. A., Volger, S., Sarwer, D. B., Vetter, M. L., Tsai, A. G.,
Berkowitz, R. I. ,... Moore, R. H. (2011). A two-year randomized trialof obesity treatment in primary care practice. The New England Journal
of Medicine, 365, 1969–1979. http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJ-
Moa1109220
Wansink, B. (2010, December). Designing interventions that stick: Behav-
ioral event monitoring . Presented at NIH Workshop on “Translating
Ideas into Interventions: The Process of Developing Behavorial Inter-ventions.” Bethesda, MD. Retrieved from http://www.nihorbit.org/
ORBIT%20Content/Workshops%20and%20Conferences.aspx?PageView/H11005Shared
Yoon, P. W., Bastian, B., Anderson, R. N., Collins, J. L., Jaffe, H. W., &
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). (2014, May 2).Potentially preventable deaths from the five leading causes of death—United States, 2008–2010. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 63,
369–374.
Zucker, D. R., Ruthazer, R., & Schmid, C. H. (2010). Individual (N-of-1)
trials can be combined to give population comparative treatment effectestimates: Methodologic considerations. Journal of Clinical Epidemiol-
ogy, 63, 1312–1323. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2010.04.020
Received January 31, 2014
Revision received August 19, 2014
Accepted August 21, 2014 /H18546This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.982 CZAJKOWSKI ET AL.
View publication stats
