From Ideas to Interventions: A Review and Comparison of Frameworks
Used in Early Phase Behavioral Translation Research
Susan M. Czajkowski1and Christine M. Hunter2
1Health Behaviors Research Branch, Behavioral Research Program, Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
2Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research, Office of the Director, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States
Developing and testing more effective health-related behavioral interventions is critical to making progress
in improving disease prevention and treatment. One way to achieve this goal is to use a systematic and pro-
gressive framework that outlines the steps needed to translate theories, ﬁndings, and basic understandings
about human behavior into risk factor and disease management or mitigation strategies. Although severalframeworks and process models have been designed to inform the development and optimization of health-
related behavioral interventions, little guidance is available to compare key aspects of these models, clarify
their common and unique features, and aid in selecting the best approach for a speci ﬁc research question.
This article describes the major frameworks that focus on early phase translation —that is, approaches that
address the design and optimization of behavioral interventions before testing in Phase III ef ﬁcacy trials.
Differences between and common features of these models are described, opportunities for combining
frameworks to maximize their impact are noted, and guidance is provided to enable investigators to choose
the most useful model(s) when designing and optimizing health-related behavioral interventions. The goal ofthis article is to promote the consistent use of frameworks that encourage a systematic, progressive approach
to behavioral intervention development and testing as one way to encourage the creation of well-character-
ized, optimized, and potentially more effective health-related behavioral interventions.
Keywords: behavioral intervention development, translational frameworks, early phase translation
Supplemental materials: https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0001095.supp
Designing more effective health-related behavioral interventions to
improve disease management and address behavioral risk factors (e.g.,tobacco use, adverse diet, sedentary lifestyles, overweight, and obesity)is a critical element in reducing incidence, mitigating progression, andenhancing recovery for chronic diseases such as cancer, cardiovasculardisease, and diabetes ( Mokdad et al., 2004 ;Schroeder, 2007 ). Unfortu-
nately, relatively few behavioral interventions have demonstrated anability to produce signi ﬁcant and sustainable impacts on either behav-
ioral risk factors or the chronic diseases associated with them. This point
has been emphasized in several recent behavioral trial reviews and com-
mentaries that cite a number of problems with behavioral clinical trials
and call for new approaches to designing and testing behavioral inter-ventions ( Freedland, 2017 ;Lavoie et al., 2019 ;Powell et al., in press ).
A frequently cited problem with health-related behavioral inter-
ventions is that the choice of intervention components, duration, fre-
quency, and modality are typically not based on a progressive, well-delineated research process ( Lavoie et al., 2019 ;Powell et al., in
press ). In addition, few behavioral intervention studies evaluate
health outcomes (e.g., incidence of diabetes or CVD) that are mean-
ingful to patients, providers, health care systems, or payers ( Freed-
land, 2017 ;Lavoie et al., 2019 ;Powell et al., in press ). Behavioral
interventions are also not easily incorporated into medical practice or
other health care systems due to complexity, cost or mode of deliv-
ery, and a focus on provider and system needs and constraints early
in intervention development is an important problem to be addressed
(Lavoie et al., 2019 ). One of the conclusions reached at a conference
of the International Behavioural Trials Network —a group of
researchers and practitioners “working to improve the quality of
clinical trials and behavioural interventions ”(see https://www
.ibtnetwork.org )—was that, “We need to promote a culture among
behavioral trialists that values and encourages the development andrigorous testing of carefully designed, well-described behavioralEditor ’s Note . Kenneth E. Freedland served as the action editor for this
article. —KEF
Susan M. Czajkowski
 https://orcid.org/0000-0002-6136-1972
The content of this article is solely the responsibility of the authors and
does not necessarily represent the of ﬁcial views or policies of the U.S.
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, or Department of
Health and Human Services.
Susan M. Czajkowski served in a lead role for conceptualization,
methodology, writing –original draft, and writing –review & editing.
Christine M. Hunter served in a supporting role for conceptualization,
methodology, and writing –review & editing.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Susan M.
Czajkowski, Health Behaviors Research Branch, Behavioral Research Program,
Division of Cancer Control and Population Sciences, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, 9609 Medical Center Drive, Room 3E108,
Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. Email: susan.czajkowski@nih.gov
829
Health Psychology
In the public domain 2021, Vol. 40, No. 12, 829 –844
ISSN: 0278-6133 https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0001095
interventions that capture and maintain the attention of medical gate-
keepers, health care systems, and third-party payers ”(Lavoie et al.,
2019).
One promising approach to developing behavioral interventions
that have signi ﬁcant clinical impact is illustrated by the over 30
years of foundational and translational research culminating in thedevelopment of the highly successful weight loss interventionused in the Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP; Knowler et al.,
2002 ). As outlined by Rena Wing ( Wing, 2021 ), who led the DPP
intervention and participated in much of the early research involv-
ing its development and preliminary testing, the DPP interventionwas based on a long-term, progressive series of research studies.These studies began with basic behavioral and social sciencesresearch (bBSSR) to understand the underlying drivers of obesity,continued through experimental studies evaluating the effects ofvarious weight management strategies and intervention compo-
nents, and culminated in a large-scale Phase III randomized clini-
cal trial that demonstrated the resulting intervention signi ﬁcantly
reduced the incidence of diabetes in prediabetics relative to metfor-min and a placebo control group and continued to show sustainedbeneﬁt1 5y e a r sl a t e r( Diabetes Prevention Program Research
Group, 2015 ;Knowler et al., 2002 ).
While the development of the DPP weight loss intervention was
not guided by a single framework or model, it does exemplify a
translational approach to intervention development and testing.
Translational research has been de ﬁned as a multistage process
comprised of ﬁrst, applying discoveries generated during research
in the laboratory and in preclinical studies to the development oftrials and studies in humans (often referred to as T1 research) andsubsequently, research aimed at enhancing the adoption of best
practices in the community, or T2 ( Rubio et al., 2010 ). More
recently, these two categories of the translational spectrum havebeen broken down into additional stages and applied to behavioraland social sciences research. Fishbein et al. (2016) provide one
example of a more comprehensive translational framework usefulfor translational behavioral research in which T0 research involves
basic discovery science and mechanistic research in both animal
models and human subjects; T1 involves early stage interventiondevelopment and testing; T2 research is ef ﬁcacy testing; T3 is
effectiveness research; T4 is the dissemination, adoption andimplementation of proven interventions in clinical and communitysettings; and T5 extends this to the global level.
In biomedical research, the translational pathway from basic bio-
logical science to clinical research is challenging but bene ﬁts from
widespread acceptance and use of a well-de ﬁned, multiphase regula-
tory framework that allows drug development to proceed in a stand-ardized, consistent fashion. Translational research progresses frompreclinical animal and in vitro research that identi ﬁes interventional
targets all the way through to effectiveness trials that extend ef ﬁcacy
testing to “real-world ”clinical care or community settings ( Lipsky
& Sharp, 2001 ). A translational approach to behavioral intervention
development is also a powerful vehicle for harnessing new discov-
eries in the basic behavioral and social sciences in service of build-ing more robust behavioral interventions. We are currently seeing arapid expansion of knowledge in areas such as the behavioral andcognitive neurosciences, communication science and social market-ing, affective, motivational and social processes, choice and deci-sion-making, the psychophysiology of stress, and the dynamics ofsocial systems. Discoveries within these and many other areas of
bBSSR are leading to important new insights about behavior andbehavior change that hold promise for enhancing the power, reach,and durability of health-related behavioral interventions.
While the systematic and progressive approach to intervention de-
velopment exempli ﬁed by translational research is potentially useful
it should be noted that it is not the only avenue through which ef ﬁca-
cious behavioral interventions can be designed, optimized, and tested.Approaches using methods derived from engineering have led to thedesign of effective behavioral interventions in the area of weightmanagement ( Savage et al., 2014 ), and use of systems science and
computational modeling approaches ( Cipresso, 2015 ;Luke & Stama-
takis, 2012 ), as well as arti ﬁcial intelligence and data-mining methods
(Robila & Robila, 2020 ), have led to novel discoveries and the devel-
opment of innovative interventions for obesity (
Gittelsohn et al.,
2014) and tobacco control ( Luke et al., 2017 ). Disciplines other than
basic behavioral science, such as engineering and agile software de-velopment ( Hekler et al., 2016 ) offer examples of other types of
frameworks that can be useful in moving an idea from concept toeffective application.
Health-related behavioral interventions have been grounded in be-
havioral theory and basic behavioral science ﬁndings since the
inception of behavioral medicine as a ﬁeld, but only recently has
early phase behavioral translation research been emphasized as anarea of science in its own right. This recognition has been accompa-nied by an emphasis on developing systematic models or frame-works of the behavioral intervention development process, similar tothe“bench to bedside ”research phase in biomedical research ( Czaj-
kowski et al., 2016 ). While the biomedical model of translational
research may not always be ideally suited to developing and testingcomplex and multilevel behavioral interventions, it illustrates how amodel or framework can be useful in facilitating the translation ofnovel ideas and ﬁndings from discovery to implementation. Follow-
ing a systematic, progressive framework that guides selection andtesting of intervention components, informs modes of delivery, and
incorporates end-users ’needs can help resolve many of the problems
raised in prior critiques of health-related behavioral trial research.
Early models of behavioral intervention development, largely ori-
ented toward public health program planning, focused on theory andmethods development in early stages of intervention design. Morerecently there has been an increase in the number of frameworksthat acknowledge and describe in detail the processes and methodsuseful for translating bBSSR theory and ﬁndings into interventions.
Notably, unlike in the biomedical arena, there has been a lack ofconsensus regarding a framework to be used in early phase behav-ioral translation research. Instead of a standardized, “consensus ”
model or framework, there now exist several frameworks and pro-cess models aimed at translating theory and/or basic behavioral sci-ence ﬁndings into health-related behavioral interventions. This is
also true of later-phase translational research, where some havedocumented as many as 61 frameworks that have been developed toguide dissemination and implementation (D&I) research ( Tabak et
al., 2012 ). However, while some of the models that describe early
phase behavioral intervention development also include later-phasesof translation, these models are typically distinct from frameworkssuch as RE-AIM that focus primarily or exclusively on dissemina-tion and implementation research ( Glasgow et al., 1999 ).
Although multiple frameworks for behavioral intervention devel-
opment and preliminary testing exist, little guidance is available that830 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
identi ﬁes and compares key aspects of these models, delineates their
common and unique features, and informs the selection of the best
approach for a speci ﬁc research question. In this article, several major
frameworks are discussed that include behavioral intervention devel-opment —that is, approaches that focus on or at least address the
design and optimization of behavioral interventions before their test-
i n gi nP h a s eI I Ie f ﬁcacy or Phase IV effectiveness trials. Differences
and common features of these frameworks are discussed, as well as
how and when some of them can be combined to enhance their
impact and scope. Finally, key features of each framework aredescribed, and guidance is provided regarding which frameworks
best address speci ﬁc goals of intervention development research. The
intention is to promote greater knowledge about early phase behav-ioral translational research and the frameworks or approaches that
can facilitate it; highlight important commonalities and synergies
between the frameworks; and provide guidance to enable investiga-tors to make an informed choice when designing and optimizing
health-related behavioral interventions.
Frameworks for Intervention Development
Models That Emerged From Health Promotion Research
Early frameworks involving intervention design and preliminary
testing re ﬂect a population health focus —a solutions-oriented
approach that emphasizes community involvement and stake-
holder engagement, inclusion of policy and the environment as
intervention targets, an emphasis not only on the individual but oncontext, and evaluation of the intervention ’s impact at the popula-
tion level rather than individual level.PRECEDE-PROCEED Model
The PRECEDE-PROCEED model ( Green, 1974 ;Green &
Kreuter, 2005 ) represents an ecological approach to health promo-
tion. It is a planning model ( Crosby & Noar, 2011 ) that empha-
sizes beginning with the desired end point of the intervention and
working backward to achieve the speci ﬁed goal, with community
participation featured as a critical aspect of the model. PRECEDEand PROCEED are acronyms. PRECEDE ( Predisposing ,Rein-
forcing , and Enabling Constructs in Educational/Environmental
Diagnosis and Evaluation ) focuses on the processes leading up to
a health behavior change intervention. PROCEED ( Policy ,Regu-
latory , and Organizational Constructs in Educational and Envi-
ronmental Development ) covers processes inherent in conducting
or implementing the intervention (see Figure 1 ).
PRECEDE-PROCEED encompasses eight phases: four PRE-
CEDE phases (intervention development) and four PROCEED
phases (implementing the intervention). Planning the interventionin PRECEDE begins with Phase 1 , which is aimed at identifying
the desired result or end product of the intervention; Phase 2
involves identifying and prioritizing issues and/or conditions that
either act as facilitators or barriers to achieving the desired result,including behavioral, lifestyle, and/or environmental factors that
affect them; Phase 3 focuses on identifying the predisposing, ena-
bling, and reinforcing factors that affect the identi ﬁed behavioral,
lifestyle, and/or environmental factors; and Phase 4 involves iden-
tifying the relevant administrative and policy factors that can in ﬂu-
ence the process and affect the result.
PROCEED involves four subsequent phases that describe imple-
mentation and evaluation of the intervention and its achievement of
Figure 1
PRECEDE-PROCEED Model ( Green, 1974 )
Note. PRECEDE = Predisposing, Reinforcing, and Enabling Constructs in Educational/
Environmental Diagnosis and Evaluation; PROCEED = Policy, Regulatory, and Organizational
Constructs in Educational and Environmental Development. From Health Program Planning:
An Educational and Ecological Approach (4th ed.) , by L. Green and M. Kreuter, 2005,
McGraw-Hill. McGraw-Hill has transferred their copyright to co-authors Lawrence Green and
Marshall Kreuter, who have given us permission to reproduce the ﬁgure in this publication.IDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS 831
the original goal. In Phase 5 , the intervention is designed and
implemented; Phase 6 involves process evaluation and assesses
whether the intervention is being conducted as planned; Phase 7
involves evaluation of impact (has the intervention achieved the
desired impact on the population being targeted); and ﬁnally, Phase
8involves outcome evaluation (has the intervention achieved the
desired outcome outlined at the outset).
The PRECEDE-PROCEED model is extremely ﬂexible and
does not specify methods or study designs for use in each of the
phases, nor does it de ﬁne milestones for moving from one phase
to the next. Thus, the model lacks guidance about the types of
studies most useful for developing an intervention. One of this
model ’s most positive features is its emphasis, at the outset of
planning, on incorporating input and involvement from all sectors
of a community, from the end-users or stakeholders (the targetpopulation), to policymakers, community leaders, community
members, and organizations, and all those potentially affected or
involved in implementing the program. This framework is also no-
table for its inclusion of environmental, administrative, and policy
factors as key features of the intervention being developed —thus,
it is multilevel in nature, focusing not only on the individual, but
also on the context (social, policy, and environment) in which the
individual resides.
Intervention Mapping
Intervention Mapping (IM) is an intervention development
framework ( Bartholomew Eldridge et al., 2016 ) that describes an
iterative process that begins with problem identi ﬁcation and pro-
ceeds through a series of six steps, each of which involves a set of
tasks that provide guidance for the following steps. The series of
steps integrate theory and evidence in a framework that encom-
passes intervention development, implementation, and evaluation
(seeFigure 2 ).The six steps are as follows: Step 1 involves conducting a needs
assessment to identify the problem and what is required to addressit; in Step 2 , one identi ﬁes the beliefs and behaviors that should be
targeted by the intervention to address the problem; Step 3
involves identifying theory-based methods that address the behav-
ioral determinants and de ﬁne practical applications of these meth-
ods; in Step 4 , one combines the methods and applications into an
overarching intervention program; Step 5 aims to identify methods
to facilitate the adoption, implementation, and maintenance of the
intervention program within a real-world context; Step 6 involves
describing a plan to evaluate process and outcomes of the inter-vention. It is an iterative, bidirectional model that moves interven-tion development through a series of phases and permits reversionto earlier steps in the intervention development process, if needed.
The IM approach goes beyond de ﬁning these broad steps to
describe the speci ﬁc tasks within each step that must be achieved
to move forward to subsequent steps. For example, Step 1 involves
not only description of a health problem to be addressed, but theeffect of this problem on the population of interest, identi ﬁcation
of behavioral and environmental causes of the problem as well asan understanding of community needs and strengths relative to theproblem. In Step 2 , a set of matrices is constructed consisting of
multiple levels at which the intervention applies (i.e., individual
through social, policy, and environmental). The matrices de ﬁne
the targets of the intervention and what must be changed by whomat each of the levels.
The speci ﬁcs of de ﬁning components and modes of delivery for
an intervention are contained in Step 3 (program design) while
incorporating those methods into a set of plans and program mate-
rials, as well as pretesting and re ﬁning these materials, are
addressed in Step 4 (program production). However, similar to
PRECEDE-PROCEED, there is limited speci ﬁcity about the ways
in which program elements can be developed, delivery modalitiestested, and programs optimized —IM relies on the investigator to
Figure 2
Intervention Mapping Framework
Note. Republished with permission of John Wiley & Sons –Books. From Planning Health Promotion
Programs: An Intervention Mapping Approach (4th ed.) , by L. K. Bartholomew Eldridge, C. M. Markham, R.
A. C. Ruiter, M. E. Fernàndez, G. Kok, and G. S. Parcel, 2016, Wiley. Copyright 2016 by John Wiley & Sons,Inc. Permission conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.832 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
deﬁne these details based on the theory used and the context in
which the intervention will be applied.
Greenwald and Cullen Model
Greenwald and Cullen (1985) proposed a ﬁve-phase model to
guide cancer control research (see Figure 3 ):Phase I (Hypothesis
development) is aimed at identifying and synthesizing all available
scienti ﬁc evidence about a cancer problem and possible interven-
tions that can be applied, assessing current basic research ﬁndings,
and developing a testable hypothesis about the effectiveness ofapplying an intervention; Phase II (Methods development) charac-
terizes the variables to be controlled or monitored in subsequent
intervention studies and ensures accurate and valid procedures areavailable for conducting later phase studies. This phase includespilot testing of feasibility and acceptability of the proposed inter-vention in a speci ﬁc population group; development and pilot test-
ing of data collection forms and testing of translations of
materials. Phase III (Controlled intervention trials) involves test-
ing the hypotheses developed in Phase I , with the use of the meth-
odology validated in Phase II . The Phase III studies test the
efﬁcacy of an intervention on a group of individuals who may be
selected with the idea to optimize the interpretation of ef ﬁcacy. In
Phase IV (Deﬁned population studies), the impact of an ef ﬁcacious
intervention is determined when it is applied in a controlled studyof a de ﬁned population, and barriers to widespread adoption of the
intervention and methods for overcoming these barriers are identi-
ﬁed.Phase V (Demonstration and implementation) involves apply-
ing the proven intervention (from Phase IV ) in a community at
large, with measurement of the public health impact.
While Greenwald and Cullen include phases of research before the
Phase III ef ﬁcacy trial (e.g., hypothesis development, assessment of
literature, and feasibility pilot tests), their preef ﬁc a c yp h a s e sd on o t
outline the steps needed nor do they describe any of the possiblemethods that can be used to de ﬁne, re ﬁne and preliminarily test be-
havioral interventions. For example, little guidance is provided to theresearcher on how to identify treatment targets (either de ﬁned as ulti-
mate health outcomes of the eventual intervention or intermediate/
proximal treatment targets); how to design and conduct studies todeﬁne intervention components; how to re ﬁne or optimize interven-
tions; and what the milestones are for moving to later stages of inter-
vention development and testing.Thus, although Greenwald and Cullen ’sﬁve-phase model includes
phases that precede the Phase III and IV ef ﬁcacy/effectiveness testing,
the description of these early phases omits many details regarding spe-
ciﬁc processes and procedures through which the ideas and ﬁndings
from basic science or theory are developed into interventions.
Flay Model
Flay (1986) proposes eight phases of research involved in the de-
velopment of health promotion programs (see Figure 4 ):Phase I
(Basic research) involves conducting research on basic mecha-nisms (social, psychological, educational, etc.); Phase II (Hypoth-
esis development) involves developing hypotheses about new
approaches to health promotion for a speci ﬁc health problem and
conducting small-scale pilot tests of intervention components;Phase III (Pilot applied research) involves conducting preliminary
tests of new approaches using pre- or quasi-experimental designs
but on a very small-scale (few individuals or aggregated units per
condition); Phase IV (Prototype studies) involves conducting
smaller-scale tests of re ﬁned programs using experimental or
quasi-experimental designs and assessing desired behavioral out-comes added at this Phase or Phase III ;Phase V (Efﬁcacy trials)
involves conducting experimental (randomized) trials large
enough to detect effects on identi ﬁed behavioral outcomes; Phase
VI(Treatment effectiveness trials) involves the conduct of trials to
determine the effectiveness and acceptability of ef ﬁcacious pro-
grams on a broader population; Phase VII (Implementation effec-
tiveness trials) involves the conduct of trials to determineeffectiveness of an ef ﬁcacious and acceptable program under real-
world conditions; and Phase VIII (Demonstration studies) involves
studies to determine effects of an ef ﬁcacious program on public
health on a wider scale (schools, cities, and states).
Flay’s eight-phase model builds on and extends the Greenwald and
Cullen model. It speci ﬁcally identi ﬁes several early (preef ﬁcacy)
phases, for example, Phase II –IV (hypothesis development and small-
scale pilot studies; pilot applied research; and prototype studies). How-ever, as with Greenwald and Cullen, Flay provides little detail on
designs to be applied across this model. Besides stating that these early
stages should involve small-scale, experimental or quasi-experimentalstudies, no speci ﬁc study methods are discussed, nor are there mile-
stones (treatment targets) for moving forward from one phase to
another. In addition, there is no explicit mention of bidirectionality; it is
Figure 3
Greenwald and Cullen ’s Cancer Control Phases
Note. From “The New Emphasis in Cancer Control, ”by P. Greenwald and J. W. Cullen, 1985, Journal of
the National Cancer Institute ,74, pp. 543 –551. Copyright 1985 by Oxford University Press. Reprinted by per-
mission of Oxford University Press.IDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS 833
not clear whether and under what conditions moving backward to ear-
lier developmental stages is encouraged.
Notably, Flay explicitly recognizes the importance of basic behav-
ioral science research and the preliminary testing of behavioral inter-
ventions, utilization of nonrandomized (quasi-experimental, small-N)
designs in early phases of intervention development, and use of aphased approach to guide this early testing. The following quotereﬂects his visionary assessment of the state and promise of health-
related behavioral intervention research, foreshadowing the emer-gence of the more recent increased emphasis on health-related basicand early phase translational behavioral and social sciences research:
Much untapped basic research in the social, educational, medical, and basic
sciences provides a wealth of data on which to base new hypothesis develop-
ment and pilot applied research. The National Institutes of Health (NIH) mightbe advised to support more such research. This would be more desirable thanthe current practice of leaving the support of developmental research (Phases
II and III) to the few local health agencies who support educational, psychoso-
cial, or behavioral research, while the bulk of federal funds is concentrated inPhases IV and VI –VIII studies. A few well-placed dollars in support of initial
tests of new, creative ideas might provide a substantial payoff in the long run.
Without such support, younger scientists are not provided the opportun ities
they deserve to test their ideas, and the future development of the health pro-motional sciences runs the danger of being thwarted, forever frozen in a cycleof tests of minor variations of current approaches. ( Flay, 1986 , p. 467)
Models for Basic Science-Informed Behavioral
Intervention Research
Recently, several frameworks have been developed that focus
explicitly on the identi ﬁcation of underlying mechanisms ordrivers —biobehavioral, social, or psychological —of an individu-
al’s health-related behaviors and the translation of these basic be-
havioral and social science ﬁndings into health-related behavioral
interventions.
Stage Model of Behavioral Intervention Development
In the 1990s and 2000s, the National Institute of Mental Health
(NIMH) began an effort to explore the disconnect between basic and
clinical research and how encouraging increased translation of basic
research into clinical applications could yield more effective therapiesfor mental health conditions. This effort culminated in an NIMH Advi-sory Council report entitled “Translating behavioral science into action ”
(DHHS, 2000 ) that described barriers to and facilitators of basic-to-clin-
ical research in the mental health arena, and that stimulated a series ofworkshops and publications that elaborated on the need for integratingbasic and clinical behavioral research ( Muehrer et al., 2002 ).
During this period, Lisa Onken, Chief of the National Institutes
of Drug Abuse ’s Behavioral Therapies Development Branch,
developed a series of workshops that brought together basic be-havioral and clinical researchers to explore innovative approaches
to address challenging mental health and substance abuse prob-
lems. As part of this process, Onken and colleagues identi ﬁed the
need for a model or framework to guide the treatment develop-ment process by integrating basic and mechanistic behavioralresearch with more applied clinical research. Their framework,called the Stage Model of Treatment Development, began as athree-stage model for developing treatments in mental health andsubstance abuse ( Rounsaville et al., 2001 ) and has since been re-
vised to encompass six stages of intervention development andtesting ( Onken et al., 2014 ; see Figure 5 ).Figure 4
Flay ’s Eight-Phase Model
Note. From “Efﬁcacy and Effectiveness Trials (and Other Phases of Research) in the Development of Health
Promotion Programs, ”by B. R. Flay, 1986, Preventive Medicine ,15, pp. 451 –474 ( https://doi.org/10.1016/
0091-7435(86)90024-1 ). Copyright 1986 by Elsevier Inc. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier.834 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
Stage 0 (Basic Research) involves basic science that occurs before
intervention development; Stage I (Intervention Generation/Re ﬁne-
ment) encompasses all activities related to the creation and preliminarytesting of a new behavioral intervention, and includes Stage IA (genera-
tion of new behavioral interventions, modi ﬁcation/adaptation/re ﬁne-
ment of existing interventions) and Stage IB (feasibility and pilot
testing); Stage II (Efﬁcacy–Research Clinics) consists of experimental
testing of promising behavioral interventions in research settings withresearch-based providers and patients; Stage III (Efﬁcacy–Community
Clinics) consists of experimental testing of promising behavioral inter-ventions in community settings with community-based providers butmaintains a high level of control over intervention delivery to maximizeinternal validity; Stage IV (Effectiveness) examines empirically sup-
ported behavioral interventions in community settings with commu-nity-based providers but allows for more adaptation/less control tomaximize external validity; Stage V (Implementation and Dissemina-
tion) examines strategies of implementation and adoption of empirically
supported interventions in community settings. Within the model,arrows indicate pathways through which a researcher can move fromone stage to another (e.g., one can move from Stage I –“Intervention
Generation/Re ﬁnement ”–to Stage III –“Efﬁcacy in “Real-world ”Set-
tings”–and back again from Stage III to Stage I). Dotted arrows indi-
cate pathways meriting “caution ”in moving from early (controlled)
efﬁcacy research to later stages of ef ﬁcacy, effectiveness, and imple-
mentation research, due to a need to fully characterize mechanisms ofaction and identify essential and nonessential components of the inter-vention before moving forward.
In the Stage Model, treatment development can be based on basic
behavioral science theory or ﬁndings as well as clinical observation,
and the model is iterative in nature —movement back to prior phases ofdevelopment may be warranted if desired outcomes are not achieved in
later phases. It provides more detail about early phases of behavioral
intervention development than some of the other models (e.g., either
Flay or Greenwald and Cullen), provides milestones for forward move-ment through its stages, acknowledges use of basic behavioral science
ﬁndings in treatment development, and proposes a bidirectional treat-
ment development process. It also includes speci ﬁcs about manual de-
velopment and training of therapists in early phase treatment
development research. The revised (2014) Stage Model encourages
research aimed at identifying mechanisms of action at each stage of thebehavioral intervention development process and describes behavioral
intervention development as incomplete until the intervention is imple-
mentable (e.g., includes materials describing how to ensure that com-munity providers administer the intervention with ﬁdelity). Thus, the
Stage Model views the entire spectrum of stages, from basic science to
implementation research, as part of the intervention development pro-cess. However, it does not provide detail in terms of treatment develop-
ment methods and does not specify the use of clinically signi ﬁcant
treatment targets to guide intervention development.
The EVOLVE Mixed-Methods Approach to Behavioral
Intervention Development
EVOLVE (Explore Values, Operationalize and Learn, and eValu-
ate Ef ﬁcacy) is a three-phase, mixed-methods approach to designing
and testing health-related behavioral interventions ( Peterson et al.,
2013) developed as part of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Insti-
tute (NHLBI) initiative entitled “Translational Behavioral Science
Research Consortium ”(TBSRC), which aimed to translate innova-
tive, cutting-edge ﬁndings from basic behavioral and social science
research to the prevention and management of heart, lung, blood, and
sleep diseases and disorders ( National Institutes of Health, 2001).
Investigators at the Cornell TBSRC project used the EVOLVE
approach to develop and test an intervention involving positive affect
and self-af ﬁrmation in three different chronic disease populations
(Charlson et al., 2007 ;Mancuso et al., 2012 ;Ogedegbe et al., 2012 ;
Peterson et al., 2012 ).
EVOLVE involves a qualitative phase, a pilot phase and a
randomized controlled trial (RCT) phase (see Figure 6 ).Phase IFigure 5
Stage Model
Note. Dotted arrow indicates the importance of using caution when consider-
ing this pathway. From “Reenvisioning Clinical Science: Unifying the
Discipline to Improve the Public Health, ”by L. S. Onken, K. M. Carroll, V.
Shoham, B. N. Cuthbert, and M. Riddle, 2014, Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice ,2(1), pp. 22 –34 (https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702613497932 ),
Figure 1, p. 27. Copyright 2014 by SAGE Publications. Reprinted by permis-sion of SAGE Publications, Inc. See the online article for the color version of
thisﬁgure.
Figure 6
The EVOLVE Mixed-Methods Approach to Behavioral Intervention
Development
Note. EVOLVE = Explore Values, Operationalize and Learn, and eValuate
Efﬁcacy. From “Translating Basic Behavioral and Social Science Research to
Clinical Application: The EVOLVE Mixed Methods Approach, ”by J. C.
P e t e r s o n ,S .C z a j k o w s k i ,M .E .C h a r l s o n ,A .R .L i n k , M .T .W e l l s ,A .M .I s e n ,C .A .M a n c u s o , J .P .A l l e g r a n t e ,C .B o u t i n - F o s t e r ,G .O g e d e g b e ,a n dJ .
B. Jobe, 2013, Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81(2) , pp.
217–230 ( https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029909 ). Copyright 2013 by the American
Psychological Association.IDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS
835
(Qualitative study to Explore Values) i nvolves qua litative methods
that can include focus groups, ethnographic interviews, and/or other
qualitative met hods ( Boutin-Foster et al., 2007 )t h a ta r eu s e dt o
explore the values, attitudes, and beliefs of individuals who are the
targets of the intervention, as well as the facilitators of and barriers to
adopting the behavior(s) being promoted in the intervention. Partici-pant responses during this phase are used to shape the intervention ’s
components and mode of delivery and to tailor the intervention to the
particular patient population being targeted. Phase II (Pilot study to
Operationalize and Learn) involves pilot testing of the intervention ’s
components and delivery approach. In this phase, the intervention
and how it is delivered are iteratively re ﬁned to achieve an optimized
intervention package and delivery mode. Phase III (Randomized
Controlled trial to “eValuate ”Efﬁcacy) involves conduct of an
adequately powered RCT to evaluate the effects of the optimized
intervention on clinical or behavioral endpoints of interest.
EVOLVE is notable for its explicit inclusion of qualitative meth-
ods to identify and incorporate the perspectives, values, and beliefs
of individuals who will be the end-users of the intervention beingdeveloped into both the intervention ’s content and mode of delivery.
It also highlights the importance and value of utilizing basic behav-
ioral science theory and ﬁndings in health-related behavioral inter-
ventions and of iteratively re ﬁning the intervention ’sc o n t e n ta n d
delivery modality in pilot studies to maximize the intervention ’s
effects before more rigorous testing in a randomized trial design. Fur-
thermore, it is one of few examples in which use of a behavioral
intervention development framework produced an intervention that
signiﬁcantly improved clinically meaningful endpoints in randomized
efﬁcacy trials ( Ogedegbe et al., 2012 ;Peterson et al., 2012 ).
Science of Behavior Change (SOBC) Experimental
Medicine Approach
The NIH Common Fund Science of Behavior Change Program
(SOBC, https://commonfund.nih.gov/behaviorchange/index ) sup-
ports the application of an “experimental medicine approach ”to
the development of mechanistically based interventions for pre-
venting and treating unhealthy behaviors that promote develop-
ment of disease (see Figure 7 ). This approach includes four main
steps: Step 1 involves identifying a set of putative targets within a
psychological or behavioral domain that is implicated in health
behavior; Step 2 involves leveraging existing or developing new
experimental or intervention approaches to engage the targets;
Step 3 involves identifying or developing appropriate assays
(measures) to permit veri ﬁcation of target engagement; and Step 4
involves testing the degree to which engaging the targets produces
a desired change in health behaviors that lead to clinically signi ﬁ-
cant outcomes or endpoints ( Nielsen et al., 2018 ).
The experimental medicine approach provides a well-delineated
“roadmap ”for identifying, assessing, and validating targets of
behavior change interventions to maximize the impact of the inter-
vention on the behavioral risk factor and ultimately, the health out-
come of interest. The model emphasizes that interventiondevelopment should only move forward once there is clear evi-
dence about what works to change behavior and why it works.
While the SOBC approach is not explicit about what methods to
use, it emphasizes clear milestones for advancement. The
approach also uses biomedical terminology, such as identifyingand validating the engagement of putative “targets ”of anintervention and measurements as “assays ”of target engagement.
The congruence with biomedical terminology may enhance the ac-
ceptance and uptake of this approach by biomedical scientists and
clinicians.
Obesity-Related Behavioral Intervention Trials (ORBIT)
Model
The ORBIT model was developed as part of a trans-NIH Con-
sortium funded in 2009 to support the translation of basic behav-
ioral and social science ﬁndings into innovative interventions to
reduce obesity and improve obesity-related behaviors. Although
designed by members of a consortium focused on obesity, the
model is intended to apply more broadly to the early phase (preef-
ﬁcacy) development of behavioral treatments for a wide range of
chronic physical diseases and their risk factors ( Czajkowski et al.,
2015 ). The ORBIT framework encompasses two overarching
phases of intervention development, entitled “Phase I ”(Interven-
tion Design) and “Phase II ”(Preliminary Testing), each of which
includes distinct subphases. The original ORBIT model ( Czajkow-
ski et al., 2015 ) included two phases with two subphases in each;
it has been revised ( Powell et al., in press ) to expand the second
phase to incorporate three distinct subphases (see Figure 8 ).
The ORBIT model begins with identi ﬁcation of a signi ﬁcant
clinical or public health problem for which ﬁndings from bBSSR
can be used to determine the drivers of the problem and de ﬁne
intervention strategies to address the problem. Once these bBSSR
drivers or mechanisms are identi ﬁed, one moves through a series
of phases designed to target these behavioral drivers and ulti-
mately the behavioral and health outcomes in question.
Phase 1. (Design) includes two subphases. In Phase Ia
(Deﬁne the Intervention) treatment targets and components are ini-
tially de ﬁned. Tasks include identifying the behavioral risk factor
target and clinically signi ﬁcant/meaningful milestones, providing
the basic behavioral and social science research basis for treatmentFigure 7
SOBC ’s Experimental Medicine Approach
Note. SOBC = Science of Behavior Change Program. From “The NIH
Science of Behavior Change Program: Transforming the Science Through
a Focus on Mechanisms of Change, ”by L. Nielsen, M. Riddle, J. W.
King, W. M. Aklin, W. Chen, D. Clark, E. Collier, S. Czajkowski, L.Esposito, R. Ferrer, P., Green, C. Hunter, K. Kehl, R. King, L. Onken, J.
M. Simmons, L. Stoeckel, . . . W. T. Weber and NIH Science of Behavior
Change Implementation Team, Behaviour Research and Therapy, 101 ,
pp. 3 –11 ( https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2017.07.002 ). Copyright 2017.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. Reprinted with permission from Elsevier. Seethe online article for the color version of this ﬁgure.836 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
components and targets, describing the pathways through which
treatment can affect outcomes, and identifying candidate interven-
tion components. Approaches might include systematic reviews to
determine treatment targets and potential intervention elements;laboratory and ﬁeld experiments to identify behavioral and biolog-
ical mechanisms of action; observational studies to identify key
intervention targets and points of “entry; ”and qualitative and
mixed methods research to assess acceptability of the proposed
approach to end-users (e.g., “user-centered ”research).
InPhase Ib (Reﬁne the Intervention), intervention components
are tested and re ﬁned for strength and ef ﬁciency to identify an
essential set of treatment components; determine aspects of deliv-ery (mode, frequency, duration, dose, and intensity); and deter-
mine the need for tailoring (e.g., for subgroups). Here, methods
can include single-case designs and/or experimental studies thattest effects of varying an intervention ’s content, timing, frequency,
duration, intensity, and mode of delivery; dose- ﬁnding studies;
factorial or fractional factorial experiments ( Collins, 2018 ); system
identi ﬁcation modeling ( Timms et al., 2012 ); adaptive trial designs
including sequential, multiple assignment, randomized trials, or
SMARTs ( Collins et al., 2014 ), and microrandomized trials or
MRTs ( Klasnja et al., 2015 ).
Phase II. (Preliminary testing) includes three subphases.
Phase IIa (Proof-of-Concept) involves testing aimed at demon-
strating plausibility of the intervention ’s ability to alter the treat-
ment target in a prespeci ﬁed, clinically signi ﬁcant way. The
typical designs for this phase are nonrandomized, uncontrolled,
small-N, or single-case design studies (e.g., Dallery & Raiff,
2014 ;Ridenour et al., 2013 ).
Phase IIb (Pilot and Feasibility Testing) involves pilot and fea-
sibility tests to determine feasibility and acceptability, including
the ability to implement the protocol and recruit and retainpatients. Study designs used in this phase may be randomized or
nonrandomized, and usually involve assessment of the numbers
available for screening and recruitment, estimates of yield (screen-ing to enrollment ratio), drop-out rate, crossovers, and adherence
to treatment, among other practical issues regarding the interven-
tion and study protocol.
Phase IIc (Phase II Ef ﬁcacy) determines whether the intervention
inﬂuences a behavioral or intermediate outcome of interest that is
typically in the mechanistic pathway and/or related to the ultimateclinical or physical health outcome of interest. These studies are usu-
ally randomized and may or may not precede a larger Phase III trial.
Key features of the ORBIT model include: (1) beginning with
the end in mind , with the goal being to produce behavioral inter-
ventions that can show meaningful clinical and/or public health
impact, not just small though statistically signi ﬁcant changes in
behavior, with the process guided by signi ﬁcant clinical questions
from end users (e.g., patients, providers, public health researchers
and practitioners, and health care systems); (2)
progression from
basic to more clinical/applied stages , which addresses the prob-
lem that many behavioral interventions are stuck in preef ﬁcacy
phases, testing how to achieve small changes in behavior without
moving to Phase III and IV RCTs with clinically important end-points; the ORBIT model pushes toward the ef ﬁcacy trial and
beyond, emphasizing the importance of developing a long-term,
systematic program of intervention development, culminating in
Phase II/IV trials; (3) each phase includes clinically meaningful
milestones , specifying a priori criteria for moving to next phase of
the intervention development process, with an emphasis on achiev-
ing clinically signi ﬁcant (not just statistically signi ﬁcant) change
in behavioral targets.
Similar to other frameworks, the ORBIT model is ﬂexible in
terms of the number and types of studies within phases, the dura-
tion of each phase, and movement from one phase to the next
(e.g., one can “skip”a phase if necessary); provides guidance
regarding speci ﬁc study designs and methods for use at each phase;
is bidirectional, allowing for “failure ”at any stage and return
to earlier phases as needed; and like the SOBC approach, the
ORBIT model mirrors the biomedical framework, using PhaseI–IV terminology.
Models for Testing Complex, Multicomponent, and/or
Multilevel Interventions
Medical Research Council (MRC) Framework
The Medical Research Council (MRC) framework is intended to
guide the design and testing of complex interventions ( Craig et al.,
2008 ). It deviates from some of the other intervention development
frameworks in its explicit focus on the development and testing of
interventions in the context of the broader social, environmentaland policy levels of in ﬂuence on human behavior. The MRC
framework de ﬁnes a complex intervention as encompassing notFigure 8
ORBIT Model for Development of Behavioral Treatments
Note. ORBIT = Obesity-Related Behavioral Intervention Trials. From “Behavioral Clinical Trials for
Chronic Diseases: Scienti ﬁc Foundations ,”by L. H. Powell, K. Freedland, and P. G. Kaufmann, in press,
Springer International. Copyright with permission from Springer.IDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS 837
just multiple interventional components, but the number and dif ﬁ-
culty of behaviors required in delivering and engaging in the inter-
vention, the number of levels (individual, group, and organization)
being targeted by the intervention, and the number of outcomes
and degree of intervention tailoring allowed ( Craig et al., 2008 ).
The MRC Framework involves a cyclical framework with four
steps (see Figure 9 ).
Step 1 (Development) involves identifying the evidence base,
identifying/developing appropriate theory, and modeling process
and outcomes; Step 2 (Feasibility/Pilot Testing) involves testing
procedures, estimating recruitment/retention, and determiningsample size; Step 3 (Evaluation) involves assessing effectiveness,
understanding change processes, and assessing cost-effectiveness
(e.g., causal modeling and economic evaluation); Step 4 (Imple-
mentation) involves dissemination, surveillance and monitoring,
and long-term follow-up.
The MRC guidance provides a framework that allows research-
ers“to develop interventions systematically, using the best avail-
able evidence and appropriate theory, then to test them using a
carefully phased approach, starting with a series of pilot studies
targeted at each of the key uncertainties in the design, and movingon to an exploratory and then a de ﬁnitive evaluation. ”This frame-
work also involves bidirectional movement across stages and
includes two preef ﬁcacy phases.
The MRC framework is one of the few intervention development
frameworks that focuses exclusively on complex interventions. It
explicitly acknowledges the importance of the early phases of be-
havioral intervention development and proposes a bidirectional
model that includes developmental and early testing, citing “...the
need for greater investment in developmental studies prior to large
scale evaluations, and in implementation research ”(Craig et al.,
2008 ). The MRC framework does not describe speci ﬁcs t u d y
designs, methods, or analyses to be used but rather identi ﬁes issues
and questions to be addressed across the stages of behavioral inter-
vention development, evaluation, and implementation. However, it
does provide a series of case studies that illustrate approaches that
can be taken at each stage of the framework.
Similar to other approaches that emphasize the importance of
identifying mechanisms of action as targets of the intervention, theMRC framework promotes theoretical speci ﬁcation of the process
through which the intervention is thought to achieve behavioralchange to identify and strengthen links in the causal chain. Finally,
this framework is different in several other respects from other
intervention development models. For example, it encourages useof multiple outcome measures to assess potential unintended con-sequences of an intervention. The MRC framework also promotesﬂexibility of procedures rather than strict standardization in inter-
vention protocols to allow for adaptation to local settings.
COM-B and Behavior Change Wheel
Susan Michie and colleagues have developed a behavioral interven-
tion classi ﬁcation and intervention development framework that is
based on a comprehensive review of 19 frameworks that classi ﬁed
behavior change interventions ( Michie et al., 2011 ). This effort to
deﬁne a comprehensive and coherent framework for designing and
testing behavioral interventions is based on several tenets. First, behav-
ioral intervention components are often poorly described and thereexist no systematic, comprehensive systems for organizing and classi-fying interventions and their components, limiting progress in the sci-ence of behavior change and reducing generalizability of ﬁndings.
Second, the lack of emphasis in behavioral science on identifying and
testing mechanisms of action results in inability to identify why suc-
cessful interventions work and how they can be replicated, and if inef-fective, why and how this can be redressed in future studies.
Key to this framework is the classi ﬁcation system with standar-
dized de ﬁnitions of interventional components, known as Behavior
Change Techniques (BCTs). A BCT is de ﬁned as “an observable,
replicable, and irreducible component of an intervention designed
to alter or redirect causal processes that regulate behavior. ”BCTs
are the active ingredients of behavior change interventions ( Abra-
ham & Michie, 2008 ) and use of the common standardized vocab-
ulary to de ﬁne behavior change intervention components supports
transparency and reproducibility.
Additionally, Michie and her team described nine functions of
interventions and seven conditions or policies that could enable thoseinterventions. The result was the COM-B system (see Figure 10 ),
which outlines the interactions between three Factors. Factor 1
(Capability) de ﬁnes a person ’s psychological and physical capacity
Figure 9
Medical Research Council Framework
Note. Republished with permission of from “Developing and Evaluating Complex Interventions:The New
Medical Research Council guidance, ”by P. Craig, P. Dieppe, S. Macintyre, S. Michie, I. Nazareth, M.
Petticrew, and The Medical Research Council Guidance, 2008, BMJ, 337 , p. a1655 ( https://doi.org/10.1136/
bmj.a1655 ). Copyright 2008 by BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. Copyright permission conveyed through
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. See the online article for the color version of this ﬁgure.838 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
for engaging in the required activity; Factor 2 (Opportunity)
describes the external factors that enable or allow the behavior tooccur; and Factor 3 (Motivation) identi ﬁes the processes that direct
and energize the behavior, including both conscious processes such
as goal-setting and decision-making, and nonconscious processes,
such as habits and emotional factors.
This COM-B “behavioral system ”f o r m st h eh u bo rc e n t e ro fa
“behavior change wheel ”(BCW), which is encircled by the nine iden-
tiﬁed intervention functions that address de ﬁcits in one or more of
these conditions. These functions are themselves surrounded by sevencategories of policy or external conditions that prompt, enable, or pro-mote the intervention (see Figure 11 ).
The BCW incorporates concepts from another framework —the
Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) —that was originally used to
evaluate the behavior of health professionals implementing practice-
based recommendations but has been extended for use in characteriz-
ing the determinants of behavior more generally. In the TDF, 33 the-ories of behavior and behavior change were synthesized into 12domains ( Michie et al., 2005 ) and in a subsequent version, 14
domains ( Cane et al., 2012 ). The TDF has since been used in behav-
ior change research including the design of interventions using theBCW ( Michie et al., 2011 ).
Notable features of the BCW and COM-B model include the abil-
ity to precisely specify target behavior, the use of behavioral theoryto develop interventions systematically, the description of mecha-nisms through which the intervention works, and the ab ility to spec-
ify behavior change techniques and to link them to theories. The
advantages of the COM-B and BCW systems are that they supportthe reporting of behavior change interventions using standardizedand widely shared and understood terminology, they focus on de ﬁn-
ing mechanisms of action to provide more clarity about how andwhy an intervention might (or might not) work, and they recognizethat multilevel in ﬂuences, from the individual level through interper-
sonal and policy levels, are drivers of behavior and behavior change.
The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST)
MOST is an intervention development framework based on engi-
neering principles that aims to optimize multicom ponent behavioralinterventions ( Collins, 2018 ). The goal of MOST is to identify the
most effective and ef ﬁcient set of components before more rigorous
testing in a randomized controlled trial. Thus, the u ltimate goal of the
optimization process is to balance effectiveness and ef ﬁciency (i.e.,
money, participants, time, equipment, staff, and patient burden; Col-
lins, 2018 ). MOST consists of three phases: Preparation, Optimiza-
tion, and Evaluation (see Figure 12 ).
In the Preparation phase, the groundwork is laid for intervention
optimization through mining of behavioral theories, review of liter-ature, and secondary data analyses. This leads to delineation of atheoretical model that guides decisions that are required for optimi-zation such as the selection of intervention components based onspeciﬁc optimization criterion (e.g., a speci ﬁc level of effectiveness
taking into account cost, burden, and other contextual elements).
During Optimization , intervention components are tested
using the optimization criterion. The methods used can includefactorial or fractional factorial experiments ( Collins, 2018 ), or
adaptive trial designs including sequential, multiple assignment,
randomized trials or SMARTs ( Collins et al., 2014 ), and micro-
randomized trials or MRTs ( Klasnja et al., 2015 ). The Evaluation
phase involves an RCT to con ﬁrm the effectiveness of an optimized
intervention.
Following the Optimization phase, and based on effect size esti-
mates obtained, a decision is made to either evaluate the interven-tion in an RCT; to move back to the Preparation or Optimizationphase for further re ﬁnement of the concepts or components of the
intervention, or in some cases (e.g., if one intervention componentemerges from the optimization phase as clearly superior in meet-ing the optimization criterion), to move the intervention into appli-cation in clinical or public health practice. If a decision is made tomove to the Evaluation phase, the intervention is tested in an RCTagainst a control or comparison condition. If the intervention isnot found to be effective, movement back to the Preparation phasemay be warranted.
Figure 11
Behavior Change Wheel
Note. From “The Behaviour Change Wheel: A New Method for
Characterising and Designing Behaviour Change Interventions, ”by S. Michie,
M. M. van Stralen, and R. West, 2011, Implementation Science, 6 ,p .4 2
(https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-6-42 ). CC-BY. See the online article for the
color version of this ﬁgure.Figure 10
COM-B Model
Note. From “The Behaviour Change Wheel: A New Method for
Characterising and Designing Behaviour Change Interventions, ”by S.
Michie, M. M. van Stralen, and R. West, 2011, Implementation Science,
6,p .4 2( https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-6-42 ). CC-BY. See the online
article for the color version of this ﬁgure.IDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS 839
Two fundamental principles underlie MOST. First, the resource
management principle, which speci ﬁes the strategic management
of research resources such as money, participants, time, equip-ment, staff, and patient burden to move intervention scienceforward in a timely manner. Second, the continuous optimiza-
tion principle, which recognizes optimization as an ongoing
process, resulting in continuous improvement to an interven-tion to enhance its effectiveness and/or ef ﬁciency. Designing
and testing interventions based on these fundamental princi-ples is intended to improve the uptake and implementability ofbehavioral interventions.
Comparison of Intervention Development Frameworks:
Common and Unique Elements
Each of the models, frameworks, and approaches discussed in
this article focuses on promoting a systematic, rigorous, andthoughtful approach to intervention development. Increased useof one or more of these models has the potential to advance be-havioral intervention development research and accelerate pro-gression across the translational continuum. Table 1 (see online
supplementary materials ) provides an overview of some of the
key features of each model.
These models and frameworks share a number of common ele-
ments that are essential features of any intervention development
program, and also have unique features that recommend their use
for particular research questions. These common and de ﬁning fea-
tures are described below.
Common Elements Among Frameworks
All of the frameworks discussed describe a systematic intervention
development process that links one or more sources of ideas, theories,
ﬁndings, and concepts on which to base an intervention (e.g., basic
behavioral research ﬁndings and theory, clinical or public health
observations, epidemiologic research, and prior systematic reviews) toclinical and public health applications. In addition, all of these frame-works highlight the importance of identifying the processes that drive
behavior change and can serve as appropriate targets of behavior
change interventions. These drivers of behavior change vary fromunderlying psychological mechanisms to broader features of the
social, cultural, behavioral, and policy environment, but an essential
aspect of all intervention development models or frameworks is theprecise identi ﬁcation of drivers of behavior and behavior change.
All of these models exhibit some degree of ﬂexibility, with most
emphasizing bidirectional, iterative movement through phases or
stages in progressive fashion, but with an ability to move backward
to earlier phases if warranted. The concept of “fail early, fail fast, ”a
principle that underlies many if not most of these frameworks,acknowledges that moving prematurely to larger, randomized study
designs can result in less robust interventions and inability to dem-
onstrate effects in expensive randomized clinical trials. By usingstudy methods and designs in early phases that allow more rapid
participant accrual, intervention and data collection, early “signals ”
ofplausible efﬁcacy that can allow an intervention to move forward
to more rigorous testing can be identi ﬁed and “failure ”toﬁnd an
effect is de-stigmatized and rede ﬁned as an opportunity to optimize
an intervention. Failure in this context does not lead to premature
abandonment of a promising intervention but provides an opportu-
nity to move backward to earlier phases to better de ﬁne and re ﬁne
the intervention, potentially producing a more effective intervention.
Theﬂexibility required in early phase intervention development
research has resulted in the inclusion of new, more nimble designs
and methods, especially in early phases of these frameworks, rather
than reliance on traditional, parallel-group RCTs. The iterative nature
of early intervention design includes the use of nonrandomized,small-N studies as well as optimization designs based on engineering
and computer science models. Whether or not to use a control or
comparison group(s), and the choice of an appropriate control/com-parison group if one is used, is an important consideration in behav-
ioral intervention development research and these considerations
have been thoroughly discussed elsewhere ( Freedland et al., 2019 ).
Several of the study designs and methods used in early phases of
intervention development to characterize an intervention ’sf e a t u r e s ,
deﬁne optimal dosing, and optimize the intervention for effectiveness
and ef ﬁciency are described in the online supplemental materials .
Finally, many of the frameworks described here are complemen-
tary and can be integrated or used in combination . For example,
the SOBC experimental medicine approach can be used in earlyFigure 12
The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST)
Note. From “Optimization of Behavioral, Biobehavioral, and Biomedical Interventions: The Multiphase
Optimization Strategy (MOST) ,”by L. M. Collins, 2018, Springer. Copyright 2018 by Springer International
Publishing. Reprinted with permission. See the online article for the color version of this ﬁgure.840 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
phases of many of the frameworks, such as the Stage Model,
ORBIT, MOST, and the COM-B model, to de ﬁne mechanisms of
action and experimentally evaluate their appropriateness as inter-vention targets. The BCW and COM-B model can be integratedwith Stage I in the Stage Model or ORBIT ’s Phase Ia to identify
potential intervention components to be tested and re ﬁned. The
factorial and adaptive designs that are often used in MOST's opti-mization phase can be used in ORBIT Phase Ib to re ﬁne the inter-
vention and/or choose essential intervention components forfurther testing. An example of the latter is the testing of an adapt-ive intervention (SMART) in an ORBIT Phase Ib study designedto identify tailoring variables for use in weight loss interventionsfor African American adolescents ( Naar-King et al., 2016 ).
Unique and Defining Features
Since multiple options are available to guide the early phases of be-
havioral intervention development and testing, researchers wishing touse a framework to inform their work face the task of choosing one ofthe existing models for their speci ﬁc research objectives. Table 2 (see
theonline supplementary materials ) describes whether and how each
model addresses several unique or de ﬁning features that may help
guide an investigator ’s decision to use a particular framework.
Choosing a Framework
The choice of which model or models to use should be based on
the type of intervention being developed and the speci ﬁc research
questions that need to be addressed. Below are some examples ofhow the models and frameworks apply to various types of inter-ventions and research goals.
Developing a Broadly Defined, Community-Based, Public
Health Intervention With the Need for Maximum Stakeholder
Engagement
Both the PRECEDE-PROCEED and IM frameworks are partic-
ularly useful for developing a public health or health promotionintervention where there are multiple stakeholders and the needfor a high degree of community input. These frameworks de ﬁne
their goals very broadly —they may be health-related, but may also
involve other aspects of individual or community well-being, andcan be used in contexts other than health-related behavioral inter-
ventions. If the primary outcomes of interest are at the community
or implementation strategy level, these frameworks are usefulbecause they emphasize the importance of incorporating inputfrom and involvement of all sectors of a community at the outset
of planning , including not only end users or stakeholders (the tar-
get population), but also policymakers, community leaders, com-munity members, organizations, and all those potentially affectedor involved in implementing the program.
Developing Complex, Multicomponent, Mul tilevel Interventions
When interventions involve multiple levels of in ﬂuence (the indi-
vidual, family unit, community, and policy) and are highly complex,the MRC and BCW/COM-B frameworks may be most useful. Theseframeworks also include strategies that can be useful in designingand testing interventions with policy related outcomes as well as
individual level outcomes. While the BCW/COM-B frameworks arenot as speci ﬁc in terms of study designs and methods, they use a
standardized set of behavior change techniques and advance the ﬁeld
by improving reproducibility of the interventions developed.
Developing Interventions That Maximize Mechanistic
Evidence About the Drivers of Human Behavior
Several of the frameworks —the Stage Model, EVOLVE, SOBC
experimental medicine approach, and ORBIT —explicitly incorpo-
rate the contributions of basic behavioral and social sciences
research, arguing that only by identifying and targeting the drivers
of human behavior can we design the most effective interventions
to alter human behavior. These models are less often used in a
multilevel context, and focus primarily on identifying and experi-
mentally manipulating individual-level drivers of human behavior.Of these, EVOLVE, SOBC, and ORBIT focus primarily on maxi-
mizing the effect or impact of the intervention on behavioral risk
factors and ultimately, on disease outcomes, focusing less on
implementability or scalability of the intervention. However, the
Stage Model emphasizes implementation of the intervention, and
states that behavioral intervention development is complete only
when the intervention is successfully implemented.
Developing Interventions That Take Into Account
Environmental/Contextual Constraints
The MOST framework is the approach that is most amenable to
addressing situational or environmental constraints in developing
an intervention. With MOST, an intervention ’s criteria for success
incorporates environmental or situational constraints (cost, burden,
and time) and balances these against effectiveness criteria to deter-mine not only whether the intervention has an effect on a desired
outcome, but also examines outcomes given a particular set of
constraints that are speci ﬁed in advance by the investigator.
Conclusion
Using a well-de ﬁned, systematic framework or approach when
developing a health-related behavioral intervention has severaladvantages. Use of a framework for designing and optimizing be-
havioral interventions can encourage the systematic linkage of
new discoveries about human behavior with clinical and public
health applications, potentially leading to greater innovation in
behavior change interventions. Use of one (or more) of the models
described above also promotes the development of behavioral
interventions that are well-characterized, appropriately tested andoptimized before testing in larger ef ﬁcacy trials, potentially lead-
ing to better, more powerful behavioral interventions. This system-
atic approach can also lead to the identi ﬁcation of “failures ”
earlier in the process, allowing more re ﬁnement of interventions
and reducing the premature testing of “weak ”behavioral interven-
tions in larger, more expensive trials.
A number of examples exist documenting the value of a frame-
work in developing an optimized behavioral intervention for obe-sity ( Spring et al., 2020 ), behavioral treatments that have
signiﬁcant effects on clinically related behavioral outcomes such
as physical activity and medication adherence ( Ogedegbe et al.,
2012 ;Peterson et al., 2012 ), or show promise in favorably altering
a clinical outcome such as the metabolic syndrome ( Powell et al.,
2018 ). However, there is no de ﬁnitive empirical evidence showingIDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS 841
the bene ﬁts of using a framework compared with not using one in
developing either biomedical or behavioral treatments; in fact, a
systematic examination of the bene ﬁts, costs, and feasibility of
using a framework in intervention development, while outside the
scope of this article, would be a valuable contribution to the litera-
ture. Nevertheless, the use of a framework to guide treatment de-
velopment and testing provides a more standardized approach to
judging progress and identifying the next steps to be addressed
through research. It stands to reason that use of any of the system-
atic, progressive and well-de ﬁned frameworks discussed here
should lead to better characterized, optimized, and potentially
more robust interventions that have a greater chance of success in
large-scale randomized ef ﬁcacy trials.
All of the intervention development frameworks require a long-
term, programmatic approach to intervention design and testing
which may well require many years, multiple studies, and a team
composed of investigators with diverse research backgrounds and
skills. This is true of intervention research development that is not
model or framework driven but the use of a systematic and pro-
gressive framework or model allows for more transparent identi ﬁ-
cation of the needed next steps, gaps, and research questions to be
addressed. Support for the integration of mu ltiple, diverse disciplines,
and a long-term programmatic vision in developing and testing behav-
ioral interventions is evidenced by organizations such as the Behav-
ioral Medicine Research Council (BMRC), which have as their goal
the progressive, long-term, strategic development, and testing of inter-
ventions for behavioral risk factors for disease ( Freedland, 2019 ).
Translational behavioral science efforts and use of these frameworks
is also supported by funding agencies such as the NIH, which has
emphasized the integration of basic and applied behavioral research as
a goal of the Of ﬁce of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research
(OBSSR) Strategic Plan (see https://obssr.od.nih.gov/wp-content/
uploads/2016/12/OBSSR-SP-2017-2021.pdf ). The NIH also empha-
sizes the use of these frameworks in intervention development
research; for example, Czajkowski et al. (2016) provides multiple
examples of NIH support for transdisciplinary translational behavioral
research, and speci ﬁc funding opportunity announcements that pro-
mote the use of intervention development frameworks are included in
a recent NIH Notice of Special Interest (see https://grants.nih.gov/
grants/guide/notice- ﬁles/NOT-OD-20-106.html ).
Because the ﬁeld of behavioral medicine has multiple frame-
works to guide health-related behavioral intervention development
and testing, an investigator should choose a framework based on
how well its key or de ﬁning features address the goals of their
research program. These frameworks are useful heuristics —“road-
maps ”that can direct an investigator ’so rﬁeld’s long-term pro-
gram of research beginning with identifying a health-related
problem through de ﬁning, optimizing, and evaluating an effective
behavioral solution to the problem. In the end, like using a map to
navigate one ’s journey to a new place, carefully choosing and fol-
lowing any one or more of these frameworks will maximize the
chances of reaching one ’s destination while minimizing the possi-
bility of getting lost on the way.
References
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techni-
ques used in interventions. Health Psychology ,27(3), 379 –387. https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13142-014-0265-0Bartholomew Eldridge, L. K., Markham, C. M., Ruiter, R. A. C.,
Fernàndez, M. E., Kok, G., & Parcel, G. S. (2016). Planning health pro-
motion programs: An Intervention Mapping approach (4th ed.). Wiley.
Boutin-Foster, C., Ogedegbe, G., Ravenell, J. E., Robbins, L., & Charlson,
M. E. (2007). Ascribing meaning to hypertension: A qualitative study
among African Americans with uncontrolled hypertension. Ethnicity &
Disease ,17(1), 29 –34.
Cane, J., O ’Connor, D., & Michie, S. (2012). Validation of the theoretical
domains framework for use in behaviour change and implementation
research. Implementation Science ,7, 37. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748
-5908-7-37
Charlson, M. E., Boutin-Foster, C., Mancuso, C. A., Peterson, J. C.,
Ogedegbe, G., Briggs, W. M., Robbins, L., Isen, A. M., Allegrante,
J. P., & The Translational Behavioral Science Research Consortium.
(2007). Randomized controlled trials of positive affect and self-affirma-
tion to facilitate healthy behaviors in patients with cardiopulmonary dis-
eases: Rationale, trial design, and methods. Contemporary Clinical
Trials ,28(6), 748 –762. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cct.2007.03.002
Cipresso, P. (2015). Modeling behavior dynamics using computational
psychometrics within virtual worlds. Frontiers in Psychology ,6, 1725.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01725
Collins, L. M. (2018). Optimization of behavioral, biobehavioral, and bio-
medical interventions: The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST ).
Springer.
Collins, L. M., Nahum-Shani, I., & Almirall, D. (2014). Optimization of
behavioral dynamic treatment regimens based on the sequential, multi-
ple assignment, randomized trial (SMART). Clinical Trials ,11(4),
426–434. https://doi.org/10.1177/1740774514536795
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew,
M., & The Medical Research Council Guidance. (2008). Developing
and evaluating complex interventions: The new Medical Research
Council guidance. BMJ,337, a1655. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a1655
Crosby, R., & Noar, S. M. (2011). What is a planning model? An introduction
to PRECEDE-PROCEED. Journal of Public Health Dentistry ,71(Suppl. 1),
S7–S15.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-7325.2011.00235.x
Czajkowski, S. M., Lynch, M. R., Hall, K. L., Stipelman, B. A., Haverkos,
L., Perl, H., Scott, M. S., & Shirley, M. C. (2016). Transdisciplinary
translational behavioral (TDTB) research: Opportunities, barriers, andinnovations. Translational Behavioral Medicine ,6(1), 32 –43.
https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13142-015-0367-3
Czajkowski, S. M., Powell, L. H., Adler, N., Naar-King, S., Reynolds, K. D.,
H u n t e r ,C .M . ,L a r a i a ,B . ,O l s t e r ,D .H . ,P e r n a ,F .M . ,P e t e r s o n ,J .C . ,E p e l ,
E., Boyington, J. E., & Charlson, M. E. (2015). From ideas to efficacy: TheORBIT model for developing behavioral treatments for chronic diseases.
Health Psychology ,34(10), 971 –982.https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000161
Dallery, J., & Raiff, B. R. (2014). Optimizing behavioral health interven-
tions with single-case designs: From development to dissemination.
Translational Behavioral Medicine ,4(3), 290 –303. https://doi.org/10
.1007/s13142-014-0258-z
Department of Health and Human Services, National Institutes of Health,
National Institute of Mental Health. (2000). Translating behavioral
science into action: Report of the National Advisory Mental Health
Council ’s behavioral science workgroup .https://www.nimh.nih.gov/
about/advisory-boards-and-groups/namhc/reports/translating-behavioral
-science-into-action-report-of-the-national-advisory-mental-health-council
-behavioral-science-workgroup.shtml
Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. (2015). Long-term effects
of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and
microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up: The Diabetes
Prevention Program Outcomes Study. The Lancet: Diabetes &
Endocrinology ,3(11), 866 –875. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2213-8587(15)
00291-0
Fishbein, D. H., Ridenour, T. A., Stahl, M., & Sussman, S. (2016). The
full translational spectrum of prevention science: Facilitating the transfer842 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
of knowledge to practices and policies that prevent behavioral health
problems. Translational Behavioral Medicine ,6(1), 5 –16.https://doi
.org/10.1007/s13142-015-0376-2
Flay, B. R. (1986). Efficacy and effectiveness trials (and other phases of
research) in the development of health promotion programs. Preventive
Medicine ,15, 451 –474. https://doi.org/10.1016/0091-7435(86)90024-1
Freedland, K. E. (2017). A new era for Health Psychology. Health Psy-
chology ,36(1), 1 –4.https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000463
Freedland, K. E. (2019). The Behavioral Medicine Research Council: Its
origins, mission, and methods. Health Psychology ,38(4), 277 –289.
https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000731
Freedland, K. E., King, A. C., Ambrosius, W. T., Mayo-Wilson, E., Mohr,
D. C., Czajkowski, S. M., Riley, W. T. T., & National Institutes of
Health Office of Behavioral and Social Sciences Research Expert Panel
on Comparator Selection in Behavioral and Social Science Clinical Tri-als. (2019). The selection of comparators for randomized controlled tri-
als of health-related behavioral interventions: Recommendations of an
NIH expert panel. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology ,110,7 4–81.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2019.02.011
Gittelsohn, J. A., Steeves, E., Mui, Y., Kharmats, A. Y., Hopkins, L. C., &
Dennis, D. (2014). B ’More Healthy Communities for Kids: Design of a
multi-level intervention for obesity prevention for low-income AfricanAmerican children. BMC Public Health ,14, 942. https://doi.org/10
.1186/1471-2458-14-942
Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., & Boles, S. M. (1999). Evaluating the public
health impact of health promotion interventions: The RE-AIM frame-
work. American Journal of Public Health ,89(9), 1322 –1327. https://doi
.org/10.2105/AJPH.89.9.1322
Green, L. W. (1974). Toward cost –benefit evaluations of health education:
Some concepts, methods, and examples. Health Education Monographs ,
2(Suppl. 2), 34 –64.https://doi.org/10.1177/10901981740020S106
Green, L., & Kreuter, M. (2005). Health program planning: An educa-
tional and ecological approach (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill.
Greenwald, P., & Cullen, J. W. (1985). The new emphasis in cancer con-
trol.Journal of the National Cancer Institute ,74, 543 –551.
Hekler, E. B., Klasnja, P., Riley, W. T., Buman, M. P., Huberty, J., Rivera,
D. E., & Martin, C. A. (2016). Agile science: Creating useful products
for behavior change in the real world. Translational Behavioral Medi-
cine
,6(2), 317 –328. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13142-016-0395-7
Klasnja, P., Hekler, E. B., Shiffman, S., Boruvka, A., Almirall, D., Tewari,
A., & Murphy, S. A. (2015). Microrandomized trials: An experimental
design for developing just-in-time adaptive interventions. Health Psy-
chology ,4S(Suppl.), 1220 –1228. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000305
Knowler, W. C., Barrett-Connor, E., Fowler, S. E., Hamman, R. F., Lachin,
J. M., Walker, E. A., Nathan, D. M., & the Diabetes Prevention Program
Research Group. (2002). Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes withlifestyle intervention or metformin. The New England Journal of Medicine ,
346,3 9 3 –403.https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMoa012512
Lavoie, K. L., Powell, L. H., Ninot, G., & Bacon, S. L. on Behalf of the
Faculty of the 2nd IBTN Meeting. (2019). It ’s time for a culture change
in behavioral medicine: Proceedings of the 2nd International Behaviou-
ral Trials Network (IBTN) Meeting. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,53
(3), 296 –298. https://doi.org/10.1093/abm/kay087
Lipsky, M. S., & Sharp, L. K. (2001). From idea to market: The drug ap-
proval process. The Journal of the American Board of Family Practice ,
14(5), 362 –367.
Luke, D. A., Hammond, R. A., Combs, T., Sorg, A., Kasman, M., Mack-
Crane, A., Ribisl, K. M., & Henriksen, L. (2017). Tobacco Town: Com-
putational modeling of policy options to reduce tobacco retailer density.
American Journal of Public Health ,107(5), 740 –746. https://doi.org/10
.2105/AJPH.2017.303685
Luke, D. A., & Stamatakis, K. A. (2012). Systems science methods in public
health: Dynamics, networks, and agents. Annual Review of Public Health ,
33,3 5 7 –376.https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-publhealth-031210-101222Mancuso, C. A., Choi, T. N., Westermann, H., Wenderoth, S., Hollenberg,
J. P., Wells, M. T., Isen, A. M., Jobe, J. B., Allegrante, J. P., &
Charlson, M. E. (2012). Increasing physical activity in patients withasthma through positive affect and self-affirmation: A randomized trial.Archives of Internal Medicine ,172(4), 337 –343. https://doi.org/10.1001/
archinternmed.2011.1316
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R., Parker, D., Walker,
A., & the “Psychological Theory ”Group. (2005). Making psychological
theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: A consensusapproach. Quality & Safety in Health Care ,14(1), 26 –33.https://doi
.org/10.1136/qshc.2004.011155
Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., & West, R. (2011). The behaviour change
wheel: A new method for characterising and designing behaviour
change interventions. Implementation Science ,6, 42. https://doi.org/10
.1186/1748-5908-6-42
Mokdad, A. H., Marks, J. S., Stroup, D. F., & Gerberding, J. L. (2004).
Actual causes of death in the United States, 2000. Journal of the Ameri-
can Medical Association ,291(10), 1238 –1245. https://doi.org/10.1001/
jama.291.10.1238
Muehrer, P. R., Salovey, P., Afifi, A. A., Coyne, J. C., Kring, A. M.,
Merson, M. H., Prohaska, T. R., & Rozensky, R. H. (2002). Overcoming
barriers to collaboration between basic behavioral scientists and publichealth scientists in research on mental disorders. Journal of Clinical
Psychology in Medical Settings ,9(4), 253 –265. https://doi.org/10.1023/
A:1020758416171
Naar-King, S., Ellis, D. A., Idalski Carcone, A., Templin, T., Jacques-
Tiura, A. J., Brogan Hartlieb, K., Cunningham, P., & Jen, K. L. (2016).
Sequential Multiple Assignment Randomized Trial (SMART) to con-struct weight loss interventions for African American adolescents. Jour-
nal of Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology ,45(4), 428 –441.
https://doi.org/10.1080/15374416.2014.971459
National Institutes of Health. (2001). Translational behavioral science
research consortia . Department of Health and Human Services. https://
grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/notice-files/NOT-HL-02-005.htmll
Nielsen, L., Riddle, M., King, J. W., Aklin, W. M., Chen, W., Clark, D.,
Collier, E., Czajkowski, S., Esposito, L., Ferrer, R., Green, P., Hunter,
C., Kehl, K., King, R., Onken, L., Simmons, J. M., Stoeckel, L., Weber,W. T., & NIH Science of Behavior Change Implementation Team.(2018). The NIH Science of Behavior Change Program: Transforming
the science through a focus on mechanisms of change. Behaviour
Research and Therapy ,101,3–11.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2017.07
.002
Ogedegbe, G. O., Boutin-Foster, C., Wells, M. T., Allegrante, J. P., Isen,
A. M., Jobe, J. B., & Charlson, M. E. (2012). A randomized controlled
trial of positive-affect intervention and medication adherence in hyper-tensive African Americans. Archives of Internal Medicine ,172(4),
322–326. https://doi.org/10.1001/archinternmed.2011.1307
Onken, L. S., Carroll, K. M., Shoham, V., Cuthbert, B. N., & Riddle, M.
(2014). Reenvisioning clinical science: Unifying the discipline to
improve the public health. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice ,
2(1), 22 –34.https://doi.org/10.1177/2167702613497932
Peterson, J. C., Charlson, M. E., Hoffman, Z., Wells, M. T., Wong, S. C.,
Hollenberg, J. P., Jobe, J. B., Boschert, K. A., Isen, A. M., & Allegrante,
J. P. (2012). A randomized controlled trial of positive-affect induction
to promote physical activity after percutaneous coronary intervention.
Archives of Internal Medicine ,172(4), 329 –336. https://doi.org/10.1001/
archinternmed.2011.1311
Peterson, J. C., Czajkowski, S., Charlson, M. E., Link, A. R., Wells, M. T.,
Isen, A. M., Mancuso, C. A., Allegrante, J. P., Boutin-Foster, C.,
Ogedegbe, G., & Jobe, J. B. (2013). Translating basic behavioral andsocial science research to clinical application: The EVOLVE mixedmethods approach. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology ,
81(2), 217 –230. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029909IDEAS TO INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF FRAMEWORKS
843
Powell, L. H., Appelhans, B. M., Ventrelle, J., Karavolos, K., March,
M. L., Ong, J. C., Fitzpatrick, S. L., Normand, P., Dawar, R., &
Kazlauskaite, R. (2018). Development of a lifestyle intervention for the
metabolic syndrome: Discovery through proof-of-concept. Health Psy-
chology ,37(10), 929 –939. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000665
P o w e l l ,L .H . ,F r e e d l a n d ,K . ,&K a u f m a n n ,P .G .( i np r e s s ) . Behavioral clinical
trials for chronic diseases: Scientific foundations . Springer International.
Ridenour, T. A., Pineo, T. Z., Maldonado Molina, M. M., & Hassmiller
Lich, K. (2013). Toward rigorous idiographic research in prevention sci-
ence: comparison between three analytic strategies for testing preventive
intervention in very small samples. Prevention Science ,14(3), 267 –278.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-012-0311-4
Robila, M., & Robila, S. A. (2020). Applications of artificial intelligence meth-
odologies to behavioral and social sciences. Journal of Child and Family
Studies ,29,2 9 5 4 –2966. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10826-019-01689-x
Rounsaville, B. J., Carroll, K. M., & Onken, L. S. (2001). A stage model
of behavioral therapies research: Getting started and moving on from
Stage I. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice ,8, 133 –142. https://
doi.org/10.1093/clipsy.8.2.133
Rubio, D. M., Schoenbaum, E. E., Lee, L. S., Schteingart, D. E., Marantz,
P .R . ,A n d e r s o n ,K .E . ,P l a t t ,L .D . ,B a e z ,A . ,&E s p o s i t o ,K .( 2 0 1 0 ) .D e f i n -
ing translational research: Implications for training. Academic Medicine ,
85(3), 470 –475.https://doi.org/10.1097/ACM.0b013e3181ccd618
Savage, J. S., Downs, D. S., Dong, Y., & Rivera, D. E. (2014). Control sys-
tems engineering for optimizing a prenatal weight gain intervention toregulate infant birth weight. American Journal of Public Health ,104(7),
1247 –1254. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2014.301959
Schroeder, S. A. (2007). Shattuck Lecture. We can do better —Improving
the health of the American people. The New England Journal of Medi-
cine,357, 1221 –1228. https://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa073350
Spring, B., Pfammatter, A. F., Marchese, S. H., Stump, T., Pellegrini, C.,
McFadden, H. G., Hedeker, D., Siddique, J., Jordan, N., & Collins,
L. M. (2020). A factorial experiment to optimize remotely delivered be-havioral treatment for obesity: Results of the Opt-IN Study. Obesity ,
28(9), 1652 –1662. https://doi.org/10.1002/oby.22915
Tabak, R. G., Khoong, E. C., Chambers, D. A., & Brownson, R. C. (2012).
Bridging research and practice: Models for dissemination and implemen-
tation research. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,43, 337 –350.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2012.05.024
Timms, K. P., Rivera, D. E., Collins, L. M., & Piper, M. E. (2012). System Iden-
tification Modeling of a smoking cessation intervention. 16th IFAC Sympo-
sium on System Identification ,45(16), 786 –791.
Wing, R. (2021). Looking back and forward from the Diabetes Prevention
Program (DPP): A commentary on the importance of research aimed at
intervention optimization. Health Psychology ,40(12), 1009 –1016.
https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0001121
Received October 5, 2020
Revision received March 26, 2021
Accepted March 29, 2021 n
E-Mail Notification of Your Latest Issue Online!
Would you like to know when the next issue of your favorite APA journal will be available
online? This service is now available to you. Sign up at https://my.apa.org/portal/alerts/ and youwill be notified by e-mail when issues of interest to you become available!844 CZAJKOWSKI AND HUNTER
