Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphm20
Psychology, Health & Medicine
ISSN: 1354-8506 (Print) 1465-3966 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cphm20
A simple methodology for piloting and evaluating
mass media interventions: An exploratory study
Rachele Dale & Andria Hanbury
To cite this article:  Rachele Dale & Andria Hanbury (2010) A simple methodology for piloting
and evaluating mass media interventions: An exploratory study, Psychology, Health &
Medicine, 15:2, 231-242, DOI: 10.1080/13548501003623971
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13548501003623971
Published online: 24 Mar 2010.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 220
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

A simple methodology for piloting and evaluating mass media
interventions: An exploratory study
Rachele Daleaand Andria Hanburyb*
aFaculty of Development and Society, Sheﬃeld Hallam University, Collegiate Crescent Campus,
Sheﬃeld S1 1WB;bDepartment of Health Sciences, University of York, Area 2, Seebohm
Rowntree Building, York YO10 5DD
(Received 19 November 2009; ﬁnal version received 13 January 2010 )
To develop eﬀective mass media health campaigns it is important to explore the
behaviour-change techniques that make campaigns more or less eﬀective. Thisexploratory study observed the behaviour-change techniques employed in two
current healthy eating television programmes, and mapped these techniques onto
key theoretical frameworks. Interviews were then conducted with six participantswho watched the programmes, to identify which techniques were perceived to bemore and less eﬀective and to identify any disjunctures between the behaviour-
change techniques used in the programmes and factors perceived by the
participants to be particularly inﬂuential upon their healthy eating. The twoprogrammes were found to use similar behaviour-change techniques, with a heavy
reliance on providing general health motivation. Interviews revealed that
participants perceived several speciﬁc barriers to eating healthily, felt the needfor more speciﬁc guidance and emphasised the importance of identifying with therole models used in the programmes. Recommendations for future mass media
health campaigns include the need to educate individuals about how to overcome
speciﬁc barriers that they might face when trying to eat a healthy diet and toinclude a wider range of role models to encourage the audience to identify withthe programme participants.
Keywords: mass-media; healthy eating; piloting; process evaluation; observation;
qualitative
Introduction
Being overweight or obese can lead to serious health consequences and is a major
risk factor for chronic diseases such as, heart disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes, arthritisand some cancers (World Health Organization, 2006). However, despite theseserious health consequences, in the UK rates of obesity are on the increase withestimates suggesting that if no action is taken more than one million adults and onemillion children will be obese by 2010 (National Institute for Health and ClinicalExcellence, 2006). The aetiology of obesity remains poorly understood. Whereasgenetic factors and metabolic abnormalities may account for a small proportion of
the energy imbalance leading to obesity, it is believed that much is attributable to
*Corresponding author. Email: ah537@york.ac.ukPsychology, Health & Medicine
Vol. 15, No. 2, March 2010, 231–242
ISSN 1354-8506 print/ISSN 1465-3966 online
/C2112010 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13548501003623971http://www.informaworld.com
lifestyle, with poor dietary choices and low physical activity the key behaviours
implicated in the aetiology of weight gain (Ball & Crawford, 2006). Persuadingpeople to take exercise and to eat a healthy diet has the potential to improvepopulation health.
Small-scale interventions and localised campaigns aimed at helping individuals
make life-style changes may be insuﬃcient (Hornik & Kelly, 2007). In 1998, theWorld Health Organization suggested that the mass media could play an importantrole in reducing rates of obesity through promoting healthy diets and exercise. Oneformal mass media campaign which successfully targeted people’s exercise anddietary behaviours was the BBC’s ‘Fighting Fat, Fighting Fit’ (FFFF) campaign(Miles, Rapoport, Wardle, Afuape, & Duman, 2001). This campaign was designed toinform people about the need for active obesity prevention and to educate and
encourage people to eat more healthily and become more physically active. A survey
of 6000 randomly selected campaign registrants (made up of individuals aged 21–45)was carried out at the start of and after the end of the campaign. This surveymeasured dietary intake, activity levels, weight and height measurements,psychological well-being, emotional eating behaviour and involvement in theFFFF campaign. After the campaign, 39% of the participants reported increasingtheir physical activity levels, 44% reported losing weight and the number ofparticipants who reported eating the recommended ﬁve portions of fruit and
vegetables a day increased by 13% (Miles et al., 2001). A current formal mass media
health campaign is the ‘Change 4 Life’ campaign, supported by the Department ofHealth. This campaign includes television and radio advertisements, posters, leaﬂets,a website and free or subsidised local physical activity sessions. The aim of thiscampaign is to encourage everyone in England to make changes to their diet andactivity levels in order to reverse the growing trend of obesity and obesity-relatedillnesses (Department Of Health, 2009). In addition to these formal mass mediahealth campaigns, current television programmes which focus on educating their
participants about healthy eating may also have the potential to educate their
audiences and inﬂuence people’s health behaviours. Such television programmespresent the potential for the audience to learn the health messages and change theirdietary behaviours vicariously through watching the programme participants beingeducated about and changing their diets.
An important element in the design of any health behaviour-change intervention
is the use of theory to inform intervention design (Noar, 2006). The development oftheory-based behaviour-change interventions is a complex process, with decisions
required regarding intervention objectives, which behaviour-change techniques to
use, selection of suitable intervention materials and activities, delivery modes andimplementation issues (Bartholomew, Parcel, Kok, & Gottlieb, 2006). Currentlythere is a lack of sound evidence-base to guide researchers in the development oftheory-based interventions (Michie et al., 2008), with reports of interventionstypically lacking the necessary detail regarding the intervention design. This makesreplication diﬃcult and hampers the development of a knowledge-base developingregarding what behaviour-change theories and techniques might be eﬀective in a
given context (Abraham & Michie, 2008; Bartholomew et al., 2006). Abraham and
Michie (2008) developed a taxonomy of behaviour-change techniques, linked totheory, which can be used to describe intervention designs using a commonlanguage. Using this taxonomy could help researchers identify through comparisonacross studies which behaviour-change techniques are associated with more and less232 R. Dale and A. Hanbury
successful interventions in a given context or behavioural domain (Abraham &
Michie, 2008).
Given the weak evidence-base available to guide intervention developers,
performing a process evaluation has been recommended (Craig et al., 2007; Shaw
et al., 2005). Process evaluation encompasses providing a detailed description of the
behaviour-change intervention, monitoring of participants’ exposure to theintervention and exploring the experience of participants exposed to the intervention(Hulscher, Laurant, & Grol, 2003). For mass media, as well as for other types ofbehaviour-change interventions, it is particularly important to explore how theaudience uses and perceives information provided in interventions, and whether theyfeel that it is relevant to them (Fitzgibbon et al., 2007). This information can be usedto revise and improve the intervention by identifying the inﬂuential components of
an intervention, as perceived by the participants who have experienced it (Hulscher
et al., 2003). Indeed, recommendations have been made for researchers to use moreexploratory and qualitative research methods to pilot and model interventioncomponents prior to embarking on costly and deﬁnitive randomised controlled trialsto test intervention eﬀectiveness (Hanbury et al., 2009; Medical Research Council,2000; Craig et al., 2008). This process of piloting intervention components can helpidentify which are the most inﬂuential components of an intervention, which groupsof participants are most likely to respond positively to the intervention and whether
the intervention must be modiﬁed in diﬀerent ways for diﬀerent groups (Medical
Research Council, 2000; Craig et al., 2008).
To explore what components of a mass media health campaign are likely to
be eﬀective at changing dietary behaviour, and to identify recommendations forthe reﬁnement of such interventions, this exploratory study presents a simplemethodology that can be used for piloting mass media interventions. The studyaims to identify the behaviour-change techniques employed in two current healthyeating television programmes, and map these techniques onto key theoretical
frameworks using an observational schedule. Using qualitative methods, this
study then aims to explore the experiences and perceptions of individuals whohave watched these programmes, identifying which components were perceived tobe most inﬂuential, as well as to identify any disjunctures between the content ofthe programmes and factors perceived by the participants as being particularlyinﬂuential on their dietary behaviours. Television programmes are used withinthis current study as a practical substitute for mass media health campaigns as away of exploring the potential of these campaigns. Recommendations will be
made for the design and reﬁnement of future formal and informal mass media
interventions.
Method
This study comprised two phases. In phase 1 an observational study was conducted
to identify the behaviour-change techniques employed in two diﬀerent healthy eatingtelevision programmes. In phase 2, qualitative interviews were performed with a
sample of participants who watched the programmes. The interviews were designed
to explore the experiences and perceptions of those who watched the programmes,identifying which aspects of the programmes were perceived to be more and lesseﬀective, as well as identifying any disjunctures between the content of theprogrammes and factors perceived by the participants to inﬂuence their dietaryPsychology, Health & Medicine 233
choices. Ethical approval was granted from a university ethics committee, with
informed consent gained from all participants who took part in phase 2.
Phase 1 – observational study
One episode from two current healthy eating television programmes was selected on
the criteria of using a female role model, containing a range of health information,demonstrating a behaviour change in the person used as a role model in theprogramme, and not containing any information which may distress the participant.Programme 1 used two role models, a mother and son, and demonstrated themchanging their unhealthy eating behaviours and adopting a healthier lifestylethrough diet and exercise. Programme 2 used a female role model, suﬀering from a
range of health complaints and demonstrated that as the role model adopted
healthier eating habits and exercise, she improved her health.
Development of the observational criteria
The observational schedule comprised eight behaviour-change techniques: provid-
ing general health motivation, providing information on how to overcomebarriers, focussing on the beneﬁts of changing behaviour, encouraging formation
of implementation intentions, use of role modelling, emphasising positive subjective
norms, identifying cues to action and developing personal mastery. The behaviourchange techniques can be mapped onto overlapping constructs from ﬁve keymodels of health behaviour change. These models are the health belief model(HBM) (Rosenstock, 1974), the theory of planned behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen &Fishbein, 1980), the transtheoretical model (TTM) (Prochaska & DiClemente,1983), social cognitive theory (SCT) (Bandura, 1986) and implementationintentions (Gollwitzer, 1993). A deﬁnition was developed for each technique to
guide the researcher when coding speciﬁc examples observed in programmes 1
and 2. The techniques used in the observational criteria, the constructs andtheoretical frameworks that they can be mapped onto and the deﬁnitions of thesetechniques are summarised in Table 1.
Procedure
The observational criteria were applied to one episode of each programme, with the
researcher additionally noting examples of how the programmes had used certain
behaviour-change techniques. The data were then arranged into a frequency table.A Pearson Chi-Square test was performed to identify if there was any signiﬁcantdiﬀerence in use of behaviour-change techniques between the two programmes.
Phase 2 – qualitative interviews
Participants
Six female university students took part in this phase of the study and were randomly
allocated to watch either programme 1 or 2. Emma, Ann and Daisy were allocated towatch programme 1 and Hazel, Sam and Liz were allocated to watch programme 2.Pseudonyms are used throughout.234 R. Dale and A. Hanbury
Table 1. Behaviour change techniques used in the observational criteria.
Behaviour-change techniqueRelated theoretical constructs
(and frameworks) Deﬁnition
Providing general health
motivationGeneral health motivation (HBM),
attitudes (TPB)General information about behavioural risk, perceived
susceptibility/severity to poor health outcomes or
mortality risk in relation to the behaviour.
Providing information on how
to overcome barriersCons of changing (TTM), perceived
behavioural control (TPB)Barriers to performing the behaviour and ways of
overcoming them, e.g. time constraints.
Emphasising the beneﬁts of
changing behaviourPerceived beneﬁts of the health
behaviour (HBM)Beneﬁts of performing the behaviour and material
rewards that are explicitly linked to achieving the
speciﬁed behaviour.
Providing cues to action Cues to action (HBM) Cues that can be used to remind individuals to perform
the behaviour, including times of day or symptoms.
Encouraging formation of
implementation intentionsImplementation intentions Encouraging individuals to decide to act or set a general goal,
detailed planning of what the person will do including adeﬁnition of the behaviour specifying frequency, intensity
or duration and speciﬁcation of where, when, how or with whom.
Use of role modelling Perceived behavioural control (TPB) Demonstration of how to correctly perform behaviour, for
example in a class or on video.
Emphasising positive
subjective normsSubjective norms (TPB), social
inﬂuence (HBM), helping
relationships (TTM)Information about what important others think about the
behaviour and whether others will approve/disapprove of any
proposed behaviour change.
Developing personal mastery Self-eﬃcacy (SCT) Breaking down behaviours into do-able chunks in order to make
the behaviour easier for the individual to accomplish, thus providing
information about actual capabilities and giving individuals’
the conﬁdence that they can perform bigger steps.Psychology, Health & Medicine 235
Development of the interview schedule
A semi-structured interview schedule was developed to explore participants’
experiences of healthy eating, and their perceptions of the healthy-eating television
programme that they had watched.
Procedure
Participants were left to watch the television programme. Once the television
programme had ﬁnished the semi-structured interview was conducted. Theinterviews lasted approximately 30 minutes and were audio-taped before beingtranscribed verbatim.
Data analysis
The transcripts were analysed using interpretative phenomenological analysis
(IPA) (Smith, 2004). IPA aims to explore in detail the personal experience ofparticipants and how participants make sense of that personal experience. Due toits focus on personal meanings and experience, IPA was considered as a suitablemethod for conducting the process evaluation, exploring which components of the
television programmes were perceived to be more and less eﬀective by individual
members of the audience and exploring any disjunctures between the content ofthe programmes and factors perceived by the participants as being particularlyinﬂuential on their own dietary behaviours. The analysis occurred in four stages.First, the interview transcriptions were read for meaning, and initial reﬂectionsand observations were made. Second, themes found in the interviews wereidentiﬁed and coded. The researcher analysed each interview separately beforelooking for the emergent themes. Third, the themes found in the interviews were
structured into clusters on the basis of a common theme or relationship. Finally
these clusters were then labelled, arranged into superordinate and subordinatethemes and then structured into a summary table illustrated with examples fromthe interviews. During this stage any themes which did not appear relevant orwhich were very subordinate were dropped or combined into other themes wherepossible.
Results
Phase 1 – observational study
The frequency of behaviour-change techniques, observed in programmes 1 and 2, is
summarised in Table 2.
Both healthy eating television programmes were very similar in their use
of behaviour-change techniques. A Pearson chi-square test for independenceindicated that there was no signiﬁcant association between the programme (1 or 2)and the frequency with which the behaviour-change techniques were used, w
2
(1,N¼218)¼7.594, p40.05. The behaviour-change techniques used most
frequently in both programmes, respectively were providing general healthmotivation (27.6%, 30.1%), emphasising the beneﬁts (15.2%. 20.4%) and providingcues to action (18.1%, 15.9%). These three techniques made up 63% of the totaltechniques observed within these two healthy eating programmes. In example, in236 R. Dale and A. Hanbury
programme 1, the providing general health motivation technique (deﬁned in the
observational schedule as ‘‘general information about behavioural risk, perceived
susceptibility/severity to poor health outcomes or mortality risk in relation to the
behaviour’’) was observed when the presenter highlighted the amount of hiddensugar found in a tablespoon of tomato sauce. In programme 2, for example, thetechnique of emphasising the beneﬁts (deﬁned in the observational schedule as‘‘beneﬁts of performing the behaviour and material rewards that are explicitly linkedto achieving the speciﬁed behaviour’’) was observed when the presenters comparedthe ‘‘before’’ and ‘‘after’’ photos of the role model and her health problems whichshowed a signiﬁcant improvement.
Phase 2 – interview
Four themes emerged from the interviews. These were: (1) Perceived resource and
social demands act as barriers to healthy eating, (2) Positive incentives needed to eatTable 2. Behaviour-change techniques observed in programmes 1 and 2.
Behaviour change
techniqueProgramme 1:
frequency (%)Programme 2:
frequency (%) Observed examples
Providing general health
motivation29 (13) 34 (15.6) Presenter highlighted amount
of hidden sugar in a
tablespoon of tomato sauce(programme 1)
Providing information on
how to overcome barriers18 (8.3) 11 (5.0) Role model identiﬁed snacking
on chocolate as a barrier to
losing weight (programme 2)
Emphasising the beneﬁts of
changing behaviour16 (7.3) 23 (10.6) Role models identiﬁed going
to the gym as helping them
to lose weight and asincreasing their self-esteemand conﬁdence (programme 1)
Providing cues to action 19 (8.7) 18 (8.3) Presenter displayed the role
models weekly intake ofunhealthy food on a tableand described the heath
consequences of eating bad
diet (programme 1)
Encouraging formation of
implementation
intentions7 (3.2) 10 (4.6) Presenters drew up an exercise
plan for the role model
involving walking 10,000steps every day (programme 2)
Use of role modelling 11 (5) 9 (4.1) Presenter demonstrated to the
role models how to cook
healthy meals (programme 1)
Emphasising positive
subjective norms3 (1.4) 1 (0.5) Role model identiﬁed husband
and son as motivators for
changing diet (programme 2)
Developing personal
mastery2 (0.9) 7 (3.2) Presenter demonstrated how
the male role model couldquickly make a healthy
breakfast (programme 1)Psychology, Health & Medicine 237
a healthy diet, (3) Getting the balance right: providing speciﬁc versus general
information and (4) Identifying with the role model. The ﬁrst two themes areconcerned with the participants’ own experiences of healthy eating, whilst the lasttwo themes are concerned with speciﬁc feedback on the television programmes that
the participants had watched.
Theme 1: perceived resource and social demands act as barriers to healthy eating
Throughout the interviews the participants identiﬁed several speciﬁc barriers which
they considered would prevent them from eating healthily, exercising and fromfollowing the information provided in the programme that they had watched. Lizidentiﬁed the amount of time that it takes to prepare healthy food as a diﬃculty for
her:
I just ﬁnd it hard work sometimes . . . trying to cook something healthy especially
because a lot of it is about . . . it’s the preparation time that it takes whereas if you just
get something out of the freezer you stick it in the oven and it takes 20 minutes. Whereas
if you do something from scratch it might take 20 minutes to cook but it is also going totake 20 minutes preparation time.
For Emma and Anne, the cost of eating healthily and taking regular exercise
were considered to be barriers to adopting a healthier lifestyle:
Well I can’t aﬀord to go to the gym, like gym memberships and stuﬀ are so much!
(Emma)
It is getting all the fresh veg as well . . . sometimes it seems a bit expensive when you buy
all that veg (Anne)
Social inﬂuences were also identiﬁed by participants as a barrier to eating
healthily, as illustrated by Sam ﬁrst, then Emma:
He came in with great big . . . Swiss things, round and with custard in . . . He came in
with a big tray of them and he is saying, ‘Go on! Have one, have one, no, you must
have one!’ you know and you’re saying ‘No! I’m on a diet’ and people look at you as
if to say, ‘Well it’ll not hurt you just one’. So, I succumbed and I had one but all day Ihad this guilt trip, you know that I shouldn’t have eaten that and I shouldn’t haveeaten it! (Sam)
Since I started going out with David it’s like, he eats loads . . . he’s like ‘oh shall we get a
takeaway?’ . . . or like if he makes the tea, he’ll do like, the same portion size that hewould eat, and then you ﬁnd yourself like . . . you know like, because he has made so
much eﬀort trying to make the tea . . . I want to try and eat it . . . But, yeah I think I
have started eating a lot more . . . spending a lot of time with David then I start to eatreally badly (Emma)
Theme 2: positive incentives needed to eat a healthy diet
The participants identiﬁed several incentives which may motivate them to eat a
healthy diet. For Sam, having a goal to aim for was an incentive for her to eat a
healthy diet:
Yeah, you’ve got to have; you’ve got to have the willpower and the desire to do that.
Like, erm, if you think that you are going somewhere and you want a special outﬁt or
you’re going on holiday you’ve got a . . . what’s the word I’m looking for? You’ve gota . . . A goal to aim for.238 R. Dale and A. Hanbury
However, for Hazel an important incentive to eat a healthy diet is looking after
yourself as you get older:
As you are getting older, you need to be looking at . . . at looking after yourself more, I
mean you need to look after yourself when you’re younger but the older you get, you’remore prone to certain things really, like heart disease and arthritis.
Theme 3: getting the balance right: providing speciﬁc versus general information
The participants identiﬁed two pieces of information from programme 1 as
information that they would be likely to follow. The ﬁrst piece of informationthat stood out to the participants was an emphasis on the importance of reading the
labels on foodstuﬀs. For Daisy, reading labels was seen as important in order to
discover whether foodstuﬀs have hidden sugar or fat:
Yeah and I think that the lady that was saying about all the ready meals and stuﬀ that
have all the hidden, that don’t always tell you about how much sugar and fat that is in
them.
However, although the programme emphasised the importance of reading food
labels it did not educate the viewer as to what information they should be looking for
and food labels were felt to be confusing or misleading. Emma identiﬁed reading
food labels as something that she would like to do but she also thought that shemight struggle to understand the information on food labels:
That woman said that she had started like, checking, erm . . . the labels on stuﬀ . . . I
think that is a good thing, if you can pick that up from it . . . But, I’d just look at it and I
wouldn’t have a clue!
The second piece of information that stood out to the participant’s was the use of
a table displaying the role models weekly food intake of unhealthy food. For Ann
and Emma, this display would make them consider their own food intake:
When she spreads all that stuﬀ out on that table that is the biggest inﬂuence I think. Is to
know exactly how much there is in a week, you don’t realise . . . meal by meal it never
ever adds up meal by meal, or even day by day. You have to do a full week to seeexactly. (Ann)
When she was like adding up all the stuﬀ that he eats and doing that table of everything
that he eats, I started thinking, like, God, I wonder like, what my table would look like,and if like she would be really disgusted by what I eat and stuﬀ. (Emma)
Theme 4: Identifying with the role model
It was acknowledged by the participants that watching the healthy eating
programmes could be useful for learning about healthy eating. However, it wasalso thought that the eﬀects of the programmes would not last very long and that
the advice provided would be forgotten about in the long term. One reason for the
programmes not having long lasting aﬀects could be the individual’s perception ofthe relevance of the programme to them. Daisy felt that the role models providedin the programme had a really bad diet and she felt that this was not a truereﬂection of her diet or the problems that she personally faced when trying to eat aPsychology, Health & Medicine 239
healthy diet, whilst Emma emphasised the signiﬁcance of identifying with the role
models:
I think it is quite speciﬁc maybe to those people in the programme and obviously their
diet was really bad . . . And I wouldn’t consider my diet to be like theirs . . . I try to eatquite healthily so I don’t think that I would have to be as extreme. (Daisy)
It is going to make you think a bit more about your diet and monitor more what you are
eating and if it is like as bad as, like, those people in the programme, then you are goingto start thinking about like, erm, changing your own diet. (Emma)
Discussion
This exploratory study observed the behaviour-change techniques employed in two
current healthy eating television programmes, mapped these onto key theoretical
frameworks, and asked participants who had watched the programmes for theirfeedback on which components of the programmes they perceived to be most andleast eﬀective. This study also explored whether there are any disjuncture’s betweenparticipants’ experiences of healthy eating and what the programmes focussed upon.This methodology is suggested as a simple and cost eﬀective way of piloting massmedia interventions in order to identify which components are likely to be mosteﬀective, and to identify any necessary reﬁnements to them. Use of exploratory and
qualitative methods has been recommended by the Medical Research Council (2000,
2008) prior to developing costly and more deﬁnitive trials of interventions, and thepiloting of intervention materials has been recommended as part of the interventionmapping process (Bartholomew et al., 2006).
In phase 1 of the study, the two television programmes were found to be very
similar with reference to the behaviour-change techniques that they employed. It wasfound that providing general health information, emphasising the beneﬁts ofadopting a healthier lifestyle and providing cues to action were the most commonly
used techniques. This ﬁnding indicates that the TPB (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980) and
the HBM (Rosenstock, 1974) are the two theories most commonly underlying thesetwo healthy eating programmes, and suggests a reliance on providing more generalinformation about healthy eating to the audience. However, in phase 2 whenparticipants discussed their own experiences of health eating, participants discussedspeciﬁc barriers perceived as preventing them from healthy eating, notably perceiveddemands on time and money, as well as social inﬂuences, such as friends and familyencouraging them to eat unhealthy foods. This indicates a possible disjuncture
between the general health information provided in the programmes and the speciﬁc
information required by the participants to overcome commonly perceived barriersto eating a healthy diet. Future mass media health campaigns could be made moreeﬀective by providing speciﬁc advice on how to address these commonly perceivedbarriers to eating healthy (TTM and TPB), and through trying to develop personalmastery (SCT) in the audience members to overcome these perceived barriers. Futuremass media interventions could also emphasise positive subjective norms aroundhealthy eating (TPB, HBM, TTM) to target the negative inﬂuences of friends and
family. Techniques based on subjective norms and personal mastery in particular
were rarely used in either of the two programmes.
When discussing the programmes, an inﬂuential aspect of one of the programmes
was considered to be the displaying of the programme participants’ weekly foodintake on a table. The participants considered this to act as an incentive for240 R. Dale and A. Hanbury
monitoring their own food intake, suggesting use of such incentives, for example, in
the form of food diaries, to be a potentially eﬀective strategy. However, it emergedfrom the interviews that the participants felt that they also need to set personal goalsto act as an incentive for their healthier eating. This suggests that future mass media
health campaigns should explore the potential of using behaviour-change strategies
focussed on goal setting as an additional incentive for participants, particularly forthose who lack motivation. Goal setting is a behaviour-change technique speciﬁed bycontrol theory (Carver & Scheier, 1998) and features in SCT (Bandura, 1986) as aself-incentive, mediated by self-eﬃcacy, that individuals set themselves.
Another behaviour-change strategy considered to be eﬀective in one of the
programmes was the value of reading of food labels to gain information regarding thenutritional value of food. However, whilst this was considered to be a helpful strategy,
the participants also considered the reading of food labels to be quite diﬃcult;
knowing what is good and not good. This suggests that more detailed, speciﬁcinformation and advice on reading food labels would be beneﬁcial in future massmedia health campaigns, building on the recommendation for more speciﬁc adviceregarding how to overcome perceived barriers to eating healthier. A further aspectthat participants felt could be improved was the need for a wider range of peopletaking part in the programmes. It emerged from the interviews that the participantstypically did not identify with the programme participants, perceived their diets and
lifestyles to be considerably less healthy than their own, and this was felt to reduce the
programmes impact. Role modelling is a behaviour-change technique proposed inSCT (Bandura, 1986) to enhance an individual’s perception of their self-eﬃcacy overperforming a given behaviour. Role modelling operates through the process ofvicarious learning, whereby an individual observes another individual successfullyperforming the behaviour. However, for role modelling to work, participants need toidentify with the role model. Therefore, future mass media campaigns should considerusing a wider range of participants, rather than using only extreme examples of
people who are, for example, considerably overweight.
This study is presented as an exploratory study to demonstrate a simple
methodology for piloting and evaluating a mass media intervention. It is acknowl-edged that the television programmes selected may have a diﬀerent aim to the moreformal mass media health campaigns, such as those developed by the Department ofHealth, focussed on entertainment and maintaining audience viewings. However, ascurrent television programmes, these programmes represent a potentially persuasivesource of external inﬂuence upon the audience. The observational schedule used in
this study, whilst underpinned by key social cognitive theories, did not provide a
broad coverage of behaviour-change techniques. Broader, more detailed taxonomiesof behaviour-change techniques have recently been developed, notably the taxonomy26 behaviour-change techniques by Abraham and Michie (2008). Future researchshould apply the methodology presented here, to more formal mass media healthcampaigns and using Abraham and Michie’s taxonomy of behaviour-changetechniques to pilot and evaluate mass media interventions.
References
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behaviour change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychology ,27, 379–387.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behaviour .
Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.Psychology, Health & Medicine 241
Ball, K., & Crawford, D. (2006). An investigation of psychological, social and environmental
correlates of obesity and weight gain in young women. International Journal of Obesity ,30,
1240–1249. Retrieved January 16, 2009, from Academic Search Complete database.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A cognitive social theory .
Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bartholomew, L.K., Parcel, G.S., Kok, G., & Gottlieb, N.H. (2006). Planning health
promotion programs. An intervention mapping approach . San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Carver, C.S., & Scheier, M.F. (1998). Control theory: A useful conceptual framework for
personality-social, clinical and health psychology. Psychological Bulletin ,92, 111–135.
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., Pettigrew., M. (2008).
Developing and Evaluating Complex Interventions: New Guidance. BMJ ,337, a1937.
Department of Health. (2009). Change 4 life: Principles and guidelines for government and the
nhs. Retrieved March 22, 2009, from http://www.dh.gov.uk/en/News/Currentcampaigns/
Change4life/index.htm.
Fitzgibbon, M., Gans, K.M., Evans, W.D., Viswanath, K., Johnson-Taylor, W.L., Krebs-
Smith, S.M., et al. (2007). Communicating healthy eating: Lessons learned and future
directions. Journal of Nutrition and Education Behaviour ,39, 63–71.
Gollwitzer, P.M. (1993). Goal achievement: The role of interventions. In W. Stroebe & M.
Hewstone (Eds.), European review of social psychology (p. 4). Chichester: Wiley.
Hornik, R., & Kelly, B. (2007). Communication and diet: An overview of experience and
principles. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behaviour ,39, S5–S12.
Hulscher, M.E.J.L., Laurant, M.G.H., & Grol, R.P.T.M. (2003). Process evaluation on
quality improvement interventions. Quality Improvement Research ,12, 40–46.
Medical Research Council. (2000). A framework for the development and evaluation of RCTs
for complex interventions to improve health (p. 18). London: Medical Research Council.
Michie, S., Hardeman, W., Fanshawe, T., Prevost, A.T., Taylor, L., & Kinmonth, A.L.
(2008). Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change: The case study of
proactive. Psychology & Health ,23, 25–39.
Miles, A., Rapoport, L., Wardle, J., Afuape, T., & Duman, M. (2001). Using the mass-media
to target obesity: An analysis of the characteristics and reported behaviour change ofparticipants in the BBC’s ‘ﬁghting fat, ﬁghting ﬁt’ campaign. Health Education Research ,
16, 357–372.
National Institute for Health, Clinical Excellence. (2006). Obesity: The prevention,
identiﬁcation and management of overweight and obesity in adults and children . Retrieved,
January 14, 2009, from http://www.nice.org.uk/CG43.
Noar, S.M. (2006). A 10-year retrospective of research in health mass media campaigns:
Where do we go from here. Journal of Health Communication ,11, 21–42.
Prochaska, J.O., & DiClemente, C.C. (1983). Stages and processes of self-change of smoking:
Toward an integrative model of change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology ,51,
390–395.
Rosenstock, I.M. (1974). Historical origins of the health belief model. Health Education
Monographs ,2, 1–8.
Shaw, B., Cheater, F., Baker, R., Gillies, C., Hearnshaw, H., Flottorp, S., et al. (2005).
Tailored interventions to overcome identiﬁed barriers to change: Eﬀects on professionalpractice and healthcare outcomes. The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2005 ,
Issue 3. Art. No.: CD005470. DOI: 10.1002/14651858. CD005470.
Smith, J.A. (2004). Reﬂecting on the development of interpretative phenomenological analysis
and its contribution to qualitative research in psychology. Qualitative Research in
Psychology ,1, 39–54.
World Health Organization. (2006). Obesity and overweight . Retrieved April 15, 2008, from
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs311/en/index.html.242 R. Dale and A. Hanbury
