INTRODUCTION
Using Early Phase Studies to Advance Intervention Research: The Science
of Behavior Change
Karina W. Davidson and Jazmin N. Mogavero
Northwell Health, New York, New YorkAlexander J. Rothman
University of Minnesota
This special issue showcases how investigators working in different areas of health behavior change are
utilizing early phase studies to advance intervention development. Through the publication of design orprotocol papers for currently funded Science of Behavior Change (SOBC) network projects, the specialissue illustrates how investigative teams are implementing the experimental medicine approach toadvance our understanding of the mechanisms of action that underlie behavior change interventions and,in turn, develop an evidence base that can inform future intervention design. Given that a goal of theexperimental medicine approach is the accumulation of an evidence base regarding the links betweenintervention strategies and putative mechanisms of action, it is critical that this evidence base is readilyaccessible to investigators and practitioners. Therefore, each of the included articles describes how it isimplementing the open-science approach within its study protocol to ensure rigor and reproducibility.Each article provides information about how to register an early phase experiment before study conductand how to publicly deposit the data, metadata, and publications. The special issue includes 10 design andprotocol articles and 2 commentaries on a diverse array of scientific areas and approaches to testmechanisms of action for health behavior change interventions. By disseminating how the NationalInstitutes of Health SOBC Initiative has supported the conduct of early phase intervention studiesimplementing the experimental medicine and open science approaches, the special issue provides asubstantive roadmap to other scientists for how to adopt these approaches.
Keywords: science of behavior change, mechanisms of action, experimental method, early phase study
design, open science
Interventions that can effectively and efficiently elicit changes
in people’s health behavior are a primary focus of research inhealth psychology and behavioral medicine. Journals are repletewith reports of trials that test the impact of innovative intervention
strategies on behaviors ranging from eating and exercise to adher-ence to treatment and screening protocols. Although our researchand publication practices focus on the outcomes generated by thesetrials, there is a growing recognition that their informational valuecritically depends upon how investigators conduct the preliminarystudies that underlie the development of the intervention(Czajkowski et al., 2015 ;Freedland, 2019 ). Yet, these preliminary
studies are frequently not reported.
In many ways, the conception, design, and conduct of studies in
the early phase of research programs are the Achilles heel of mostinitiatives to promote health behavior change. Traditionally, thesestudies have been characterized as feasibility and pilot studies,with a focus on addressing questions regarding how and whether arandomized controlled trial (RCT) evaluating the efficacy of anintervention can and should be conducted ( Eldridge et al., 2016 ).
Although the value of pilot studies that are conceptualized as“preliminary efficacy trials” is uncertain at best ( Freedland, 2020 ),
investigators can utilize early phase studies to generate evidencethat provides the foundation on which an intervention trial rests. Inparticular, early phase studies provide investigators with the op-portunity to specify the constructs an intervention should target, torefine or develop methods for assessing changes in those con-Editor’s Note. This is an introduction to the special issue “The Science of
Behavior Change: Implementing the Experimental Medicine Approach.”Please see the Table of Contents here: https://psycnet.apa.org/journals/hea/
39/9.—KEF
X
Karina W. Davidson and X
Jazmin N. Mogavero, Center for Per-
sonalized Health, Northwell Health, New York, New York; Alexander J.Rothman, Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota.
This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
Science of Behavior Change Common Fund Program through an awardadministered by the National Institute on Aging (U24AG052175). KarinaW. Davidson is a member of the United States Preventive Services TaskForce (USPSTF). This article does not represent the views and policies ofthe USPSTF.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Karina
W. Davidson, Center for Personalized Health, Northwell Health, 130 East59th Street, Suite 14C, New York, NY 10022. E-mail: kdavidson2@
northwell.eduThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.
Health Psychology
© 2020 American Psychological Association 2020, Vol. 39, No. 9, 731–735
ISSN: 0278-6133 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000897
731
structs, and to identify strategies that can be used to engage those
constructs. Taken together, early phase studies can enable inves-tigators to conduct mechanistic trials that test key assumptionsregarding the mechanism of action that underlies a proposedintervention.
Yet, despite their evidentiary value, the availability of funding
to support the design and conduct of early phase studies is limited.As a result, many investigators select to address only one or asubset of questions regarding an intervention’s mechanism ofaction while leaving those that remain unanswered. Moreover, thelessons and insights that do emerge from the early phase of aresearch program are difficult to evaluate. Early phase mechanisticstudies are not usually registered at the protocol stage, their resultsare frequently not published, and their data are not deposited in anopen and transparent way. Consequently, it can be difficult todiscern the quality of the foundation on which a proposed behav-ioral intervention rests. This limits our ability to (a) minimize theimpact of early phase mechanistic studies that are poorly concep-tualized, designed, and conducted and (b) maximize the impact ofthose that are well conceptualized, designed, and conducted andthat support the research program they intend to advance. Anevidence base that accounts for our collective successes and fail-ures is essential; thus, we need intervention study protocol publi-cations. These types of publications provide investigators with astructured opportunity to delineate the questions that are addressedin their early phase studies and offer a roadmap for the next stepsin intervention development.
To highlight the important role that early phase intervention
studies play in the development of behavioral interventions, theScience of Behavior Change (SOBC), funded by the NationalInstitutes of Health, launched an initiative focused exclusively onfunding early phase mechanistic studies for health behavior changeresearch programs. This initiative was designed to not only em-phasize the importance of conducting studies prior to proceedingwith a test of the efficacy of a behavioral intervention in a ran-domized controlled trial, but also to prompt investigators to engagewith the theoretical and methodological challenges that underlierigorous early phase research. In particular, this initiative priori-tized the investigation of the mechanisms of action that are hy-pothesized to underlie a health behavior intervention’s effective-ness. To date, even when an initial intervention study returns somesignal of behavior change efficacy, it is unknown if the mechanismof action was engaged as hypothesized and, in turn, was causallyresponsible for the resulting behavior change. Without this crucialscientific insight, small changes in the behavior change interven-tion across intervention development studies may cause the inter-vention to stop working without information about why. More-over, even in the absence of these modifications, investigators mayfind that they are working with a set of intervention strategies thatinsufficiently—and perhaps inefficiently—engage the mechanismof action. To address this issue, the SOBC consortium requestedthat studies use the experimental method or add to an ongoingstudy that utilizes this approach and focus on generating evidencethat links the proposed behavior change intervention to measuredchanges in the hypothesized mechanism of action.
What is the experimental method? As applied to health behavior
change research, it involves mapping and testing the causal chainthat delineates the manner in which a proposed intervention ob-tains a targeted outcome ( Nielsen et al., 2018 ;Sheeran, Klein, &Rothman, 2017 ). To implement this approach, investigators spec-
ify the mechanism of action an intervention is hypothesized toengage; identify validated measures of that mechanism of action;test mechanism engagement by experimentally manipulating theintervention; and assess the degree to which the hypothesizedmechanism was engaged and, in turn, the degree to which itaffected change in the targeted behavior (see Figure 1 ). In most
cases, investigators will need to formulate a program of researchcomprised of a series of studies that engage with the underlyingchain of logic. Early phase studies of each of these links is vital forgenerating the evidence base that underlies the development of amechanism-engaging intervention and that, in turn, increases theprior probability that a rigorous test of the full intervention willindicate it is effective.
Because advancing behavior change intervention development
requires a rigorous evidence base that is transparent, open, andeasily accessible, the SOBC consortium also required investigatorsto specify how they would engage with prevailing open sciencepractices in the design and conduct of these studies. The preva-lence of publication bias (also referred to as the “file drawerproblem”) in protocols and findings results in significant limits onthe lessons that can be learned from these early phase mechanisticstudies.
This special issue is designed to illustrate how 10 investigative
teams, working across a diverse array of behavioral domains, arepursuing early phase work to generate an evidence base that willadvance the development of behavior change interventions. Inaddition, the papers describe how different types of designs, pro-tocols, and data types can be registered, deposited, and madeavailable to ensure rigor and reproducibility. Two commentaries(Hekler & King, 2020 ;West, 2020 ) reflect on the processes used
to conduct and communicate early phase research and delineatehow efforts to optimize the impact of this work depends on theinfrastructure and resources available to investigative teams.
Organized by the main objective (i.e., prevention or treatment)
of the behavior change intervention being investigated, we providea brief overview of each of these 10 initiatives.
Prevention
Birk and colleagues test fear of recurrence as a mechanism of
action to improve medication adherence behavior in patients with an
Figure 1. The experimental method as applied to health behavior change
research.This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.732 DAVIDSON, MOGAVERO, AND ROTHMAN
acute coronary syndrome and who present to the Emergency Depart-
ment ( Birk et al., 2020 ). By embedding this test within a double-blind,
parallel-group randomized clinical trial, researchers can determine ifelectronic tablet-delivered, cognitive-bias-modification training inter-vention compared to a sham control improves fear of recurrence andconsequently improves medication adherence. The authors preregis-tered their trial protocol at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03853213) and onthe Open Science Framework (OSF; https://osf.io/k7g8c/ ). All
planned and exploratory analyses, protocol updates, and measures andthe consent form can be found on their OSF page.
In the Halbert report, the rationale, design, and methods for a
different type of early phase study protocol are described ( Halbert
et al., 2020 ). Given the failure to attain reach, recruitment, reten-
tion, and successful behavior change in African American womencancer survivors, the authors determined that acceptability, rele-vance, and appropriate choice of behavior and mechanism targetsneeded to be established first. This protocol describes the need to(a) characterize the type of stress reactivity among African Amer-ican breast cancer survivors based on socioeconomic (e.g., finan-cial toxicity), clinical, and social stressors experienced, (b) exam-ine the impact of stress reactivity on temporal discounting (thehypothesized mechanism of action), and (c) determine the extent towhich stress reactivity is associated with adherence to recommen-dations for cancer control behaviors and treatment. Among otheractivities, the authors will perform a laboratory-based study withthe Trier Social Stress Test as the validated measure of stressreactivity to assess its effect on temporal discounting and cancercontrol behaviors. Their initial steps then will lead to the design ofa stress or behavior change intervention that can target relevantstressors and behavior change outcomes for this important groupof underserved and understudied patients. They have registeredtheir study at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03881085) and will depositdata both there and on OSF once statistical analyses have beencompleted.
Mackiewicz Seghete and colleagues report on a protocol for a
mechanistic study of Mindfulness Based Cognitive Therapy(MBCT) during pregnancy to ultimately prevent depression(Mackiewicz Seghete et al., 2020 ). The hypothesized mechanisms
of action include emotion regulation by patient report as well assecondary emotional arousal and reactivity assessed by MRI scansof whole-brain activation when participants (a) regulate emotionalresponding and (b) engage in cognitive control. This will be atwo-arm randomized trial with MBCT compared to usual care totest its ability to engage the hypothesized mechanisms. The authorsare providing protocol, statistical analyses, and amendments onClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03809572) with prior approval of theirfunding partner, National Center for Complementary and Integra-tive Health. Given the sensitivity of some information to be ob-tained from the pregnant participants during behavior change, theauthors also obtained a Certificate of Confidentiality from theNational Institutes of Health.
Wilson and colleagues report on their protocol to assess the
feasibility and effectiveness of the APPEAL intervention, which isdesigned to promote positive affect as a means to enhance HIVmedication adherence ( Wilson et al., 2020 ). Individuals who have
reported adherence difficulties will be randomly assigned to theAPPEAL program or standard of care and changes in the mecha-nism of action (i.e., positive affect) will be assessed at follow-up.The study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT04035759) andon OSF. De-identified data and supporting materials, including
analytic code, will also be posted on OSF.
Treatment
Brewer and colleagues are examining the role that worry plays
in sleep disturbance and insomnia ( Brewer, Roy, Deluty, Liu, &
Hoge, 2020 ). They describe the protocol for a mechanistic ran-
domized controlled trial to test whether adding an app-basedmindfulness training for anxiety to standard treatment will lead toenhanced changes in nonreactivity and worry and whether thesechanges, in turn, lead to improvements in sleep quality. The studyis registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03684057) and results andstudy documents will be reported accordingly. Data and analysiscode will be made available to qualified researchers by request.
Dong and colleagues are examining whether enhancing the
communication and behavior change strategies parents use withtheir children can improve adolescent sleep behavior ( Dong et al.,
2020 ). Their protocol describes a single-arm or ‘open’ trial of the
Parent Behavior Change Intervention (PBC-I), which is beingadded to a previously validated behavioral sleep intervention foradolescents. The PBC-I is hypothesized to promote parents’ use ofpositive conversational strategies that, in turn, should lead toreduced parent-adolescent conflict and improved sleep outcomes.The study is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03926221) andon OSF ( https://osf.io/npm5g/ ). De-identified data and supporting
materials including analytic code will be posted on OSF andGitHub.
Leahey and colleagues report on a mechanistic randomized
controlled trial to test whether training people to engage in epi-sodic future thinking (EFT) will increase the tendency to engage indelayed discounting (DD) and, in turn, promote physical activityand weight-loss maintenance ( Leahey et al., 2020 ). Participants
who lose at least 5% of their initial body weight during a weight-loss program will be randomized to a weight-loss-maintenance(WLM) program that either does or does not include EFT training.Measures of the mechanism of action (DD) will be assessed atmultiple points during the WLM program. The study is registeredat ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03824769) and results will be reportedaccordingly, but limits will be placed on the availability of dataand analysis code.
McHugh and colleagues report on their protocol to assess the
effectiveness of two intervention strategies—cognitive reappraisaland affect labeling—to reduce stress reactivity in response to astandardized stressor among adults who are diagnosed with opioid-use disorder and, in turn, determine whether the reduction inreactivity leads to better distress tolerance ( McHugh, Nguyen,
Fitzmaurice, & Dillon, 2020 ). The experimental design affords the
opportunity to compare the effect of the two intervention strategiesto a psychoeducational control condition, and the underlyingmechanism of action will be assessed with both self-report andphysiological indicators. The study is registered at ClinicalTrials-.gov (NCT03616379), and the principal investigator also maintainsa page on OSF ( https://osf.io/8ns7y/ ) describing all of the work in
her lab. Because of the sensitive nature of the data collected,de-identified data will be made available in accordance with ap-plicable regulations.
Otto and colleagues present a mechanistic randomized con-
trolled trial protocol for engaging distress tolerance and workingThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.733 ADVANCING RESEARCH: SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
memory (two putative mechanisms of action) to improve smoking
relapse rates in smokers from lower socioeconomic living circum-stances ( Otto et al., 2020 ). They test if the proposed mechanisms
of action are improved during stressful nicotine-deprivation win-dows—when the mechanism would or would not aid in smokingcessation maintenance. They also combine mindfulness with in-teroceptive exposure as their behavior change intervention to bet-ter target their putative mechanisms of action. ClinicalTrials.gov(NCT03565497) and OSF registries were selected for data andmeasure deposit.
Scioli and colleagues report on a mechanistic randomized con-
trolled trial that compares an exercise intervention to a wait-listsymptom-monitoring condition with veterans with chronic lowback pain and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) ( Scioli et al.,
2020 ). This study aims to demonstrate the feasibility of procedures
and elucidate mechanisms relevant to developing individually pre-scribed, motivationally based exercise regimens to reduce chronicpain, depression, and PTSD symptoms. By using the SOBC ex-perimental medicine approach to investigate hypothesized rela-tionships between exercise-training, neuropeptide Y system func-tion, and neurocognitive testing of reward sensitivity and self-regulation, they will explore if mechanistic improvements resultfrom increased exercise that, in turn, leads to better exercisemaintenance and improved psychological function. The study ispreregistered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03644927) and on OSF(https://osf.io/epfmk/ ). Final data sets underlying all publications
and conference presentations resulting from this research will beshared in electronic format on OSF through a de-identified, ano-nymized dataset.
Discussion
The 10 protocol papers provide us with a window into the
planning and preparatory work that these investigative teams areundertaking as they pursue answers to questions that can guide theimplementation and testing of their behavioral intervention. Ineach case, the investigators have identified a mechanism or set ofmechanisms of action that are hypothesized to underlie the inter-vention’s effect on the targeted behavioral outcome. Furthermore,evidence that the intervention can experimentally manipulate themechanism(s) and, secondarily, that changes in the mechanism(s)are associated with changes in the outcome are considered theprimary criteria for moving forward with the proposed program ofresearch. Although the protocols in these papers are well alignedwith the framework set out by the SOBC, the opportunity to reviewthem collectively revealed a number of issues that investigatorsmust continue to grapple with as they design and conduct studiesthat advance intervention development.
First, early phase mechanistic studies such as the ones in this
issue are designed to generate evidence that the proposed inter-ventions lead to changes in specified mechanisms but little is saidabout the magnitude of change that needs to be observed. Werecognize that identifying these criteria is challenging—especiallywhen the theoretical models that underlie much of this workprovide limited guidance—but explicitly specifying the behavioraloutcomes associated with different magnitudes of change in thetargeted mechanism will allow investigators to make informeddecisions about whether to proceed from a successful mechanistictrial to a full test of the intervention. Moreover, the process ofsetting these criteria will encourage investigators to think through
the parameters that are most important. For example, should theyprioritize the magnitude of change observed or the durability of theobserved change over a period of time?
Second, investigators may want to articulate what research
strategies they will consider if the early phase study fails toprovide evidence to support proceeding to an efficacy trial. Ap-proaches such as the Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST;Collins, 2018 ) may prove useful as it can assist investigators with
experimentally specifying the essential components within an in-tervention. Moreover, it may encourage investigators to pursuecompetitive tests of strategies designed to engage the hypothesizedmechanism of action. This may prove particularly valuable indomains where eliciting sufficient change in the mechanism can bechallenging.
Third, engagement with open science practices through each
phase of the research life cycle will ensure that the broaderresearch community can benefit from all of the evidence thatemerges from our research efforts. Moreover, the process of pre-registering early phase mechanistic studies provides a structuredframework through which to consider this evidence.
Given that, more often than not, studies in the early phase of a
research program are not funded, published, praised, or monitoredfor transparency and availability, the fact that investigators incor-porate them into their behavior change intervention research pro-grams is somewhat surprising. This special issue is dedicated todisseminating new approaches to early phase intervention devel-opment. The field of behavior change will be transformed by theprocess of publishing the design and protocol prior to conduct,incorporating the testing of validated measures of mechanisms ofaction, committing to open science practices, and communicatinghow such early phase studies progress. These articles collectivelyshow the way forward.
References
Birk, J. L., Cumella, R., Lopez-Veneros, D., Jurado, A., Romero, E. K.,
Lazarov, A., & Kronish, I. M. (2020). Intervening on fear after acutecardiac events: Rationale and design of the INFORM randomized clin-ical trial. Health Psychology, 39, 736–744. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
hea0000853
Brewer, J. A., Roy, A., Deluty, A., Liu, T., & Hoge, E. A. (2020). Can
mindfulness mechanistically target worry to improve sleep disturbances?Theory and study protocol for app-based anxiety program. Health Psy-
chology, 39, 776–784. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000874
Collins, L. (2018). Optimization of behavioral, biobehavioral, and biomed-
ical interventions: The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST) . Phil-
adelphia, PA: Springer.
Czajkowski, S. M., Powell, L. H., Adler, N., Naar-King, S., Reynolds,
K. D., Hunter, C. M. ,...Charlson, M. E. (2015). From ideas to efficacy:
The ORBIT model for developing behavioral treatments for chronicdiseases. Health Psychology, 34, 971–982. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
hea0000161
Dong, L., Fine, E. R., Michie, S., Zhou, Q., Mullin, A. C., Alvarado-
Martinez, C. G. ,... Tran, M. (2020). Open trial of the Parent Behavior
Change Intervention (PBC-I): Study protocol. Health Psychology, 39,
785–795. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000873
Eldridge, S. M., Lancaster, G. A., Campbell, M. J., Thabane, L., Hopewell,
S., Coleman, C. L., & Bond, C. M. (2016). Defining Feasibility and PilotStudies in Preparation for Randomised Controlled Trials: DevelopmentThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.734 DAVIDSON, MOGAVERO, AND ROTHMAN
of a Conceptual Framework. PLoS ONE, 11 (3), e0150205. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0150205
Freedland, K. E. (2019). The Behavioral Medicine Research Council: Its
origins, mission, and methods. Health Psychology, 38, 277–289. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000731
Freedland, K. E. (2020). Pilot trials in health-related behavioral interven-
tion research: Problems, solutions, and recommendations. Health Psy-
chology . Advance online publication. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
hea0000946
Halbert, C. H., Jefferson, M. S., Danielson, C., Froeliger, B., Giordano, A.,
& Thaxton, J. E. (2020). An observational study and randomized trial ofstress reactivity in cancer disparities. Health Psychology, 39, 745–757.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000882
Hekler, E., & King, A. C. (2020). Toward an open mechanistic science of
behavior change. Health Psychology, 39, 841–845. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/hea0000924
Leahey, T. M., Gorin, A. A., Wyckoff, E., Denmat, Z., O’Connor, K.,
Field, C. ,... Gilder, C. (2020). Episodic future thinking, delay dis-
counting, and exercise during weight loss maintenance: The PACE trial.Health Psychology, 39, 796–805. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000860
Mackiewicz Seghete, K. L., Graham, A. M., Lapidus, J. A., Jackson,
E. L. A., Doyle, O. J., Feryn, A. B. ,... Dimidjian, S. (2020). Protocol
for a mechanistic study of mindfulness based cognitive therapy duringpregnancy. Health Psychology, 39, 758–766. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
hea0000870
McHugh, R. K., Nguyen, M. D., Fitzmaurice, G. M., & Dillon, D. G.
(2020). Behavioral strategies to reduce stress reactivity in opioid usedisorder: Study design. Health Psychology, 39, 806–814. http://dx.doi
.org/10.1037/hea0000862
Nielsen, L., Riddle, M., King, J. W., Aklin, W. M., Chen, W., Clark, D. ,...
the NIH Science of Behavior Change Implementation Team. (2018). TheNIH Science of Behavior Change Program: Transforming the science
through a focus on mechanisms of change. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 101, 3–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2017.07.002
Otto, M. W., Zvolensky, M. J., Rosenfield, D., Hoyt, D. L., Witkiewitz, K.,
McKee, S. A. ,... Smits, J. A. J. (2020). A randomized controlled trial
protocol for engaging distress tolerance and working memory to aidsmoking cessation in low socioeconomic status (SES) adults. Health
Psychology, 39, 815–825. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000858
Scioli, E. R., Smith, B. N., Whitworth, J. W., Spiro, A., Esterman, M.,
Dutra, S. ,... Rasmusson, A. M. (2020). Moderated mediation for
exercise maintenance in pain and posttraumatic stress disorder: A ran-domized trial. Health Psychology, 39, 826–840. http://dx.doi.org/10
.1037/hea0000876
Sheeran, P., Klein, W. M., & Rothman, A. J. (2017). Health behavior
change: Moving from observation to intervention. Annual Review of
Psychology, 68, 573–600. http://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-
010416-044007
West, R. (2020). An online Paper Authoring Tool (PAT) to improve
reporting of, and synthesis of evidence from, trials in behavioral sci-ences. Health Psychology, 39, 846–850. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
hea0000927
Wilson, T. E., Massiah, C., Radigan, R., DeHovitz, J., Govindarajulu,
U. S., Holman, S. ,...Taylor, T. (2020). The Positive Affect, Promoting
Positive Engagement, and Adherence for Life (APPEAL) feasibilitytrial: Design and rationale. Health Psychology, 39, 767–775. http://dx
.doi.org/10.1037/hea0000880
Received April 10, 2020
Revision received May 11, 2020
Accepted May 12, 2020 /H18546This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
Content may be shared at no cost, but any requests to reuse this content in part or whole must go through the American Psychological Association.735 ADVANCING RESEARCH: SCIENCE OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
