Using qualitative methods within a mixed-methods approach to developing
Using qualitative methods within a mixed-methods approach to developing
and evaluating interventions to address harmful alcohol use among young
and evaluating interventions to address harmful alcohol use among young
people
people
Richard De Visser, R Graber, A Hart, C Abraham, Anjum Memon, P Watten, T Scanlon
Publication date
Publication date
01-04-2015
Licence
Licence
This work is made available under the 
Copyright not evaluated
 licence and should only be used in accordance
with that licence. For more information on the specific terms, consult the repository record for this item.
Document Version
Document Version
Accepted version
Citation for this work (American Psychological Association 7th edition)
Citation for this work (American Psychological Association 7th edition)
De Visser, R., Graber, R., Hart, A., Abraham, C., Memon, A., Watten, P., & Scanlon, T. (2015). 
Using
qualitative methods within a mixed-methods approach to developing and evaluating interventions to address
harmful alcohol use among young people
 (Version 1). University of Sussex.
https://hdl.handle.net/10779/uos.23407853.v1
Published in
Published in
Health Psychology
Link to external publisher version
Link to external publisher version
https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000163
Copyright and reuse:
Copyright and reuse:
This work was downloaded from Sussex Research Open (SRO). This document is made available in line with publisher policy
and may differ from the published version. Please cite the published version where possible. Copyright and all moral rights to the
version of the paper presented here belong to the individual author(s) and/or other copyright owners unless otherwise stated. For
more 
information 
on 
this 
work, 
SRO 
or 
to 
report 
an 
issue, 
you 
can 
contact 
the 
repository administrators at 
sro@sussex.ac.uk
.
Discover more of the University’s research at 
https://sussex.figshare.com/
Using qualitative methods within a mixed­methods approach 
to developing and evaluating interventions to address harmful  
alcohol use among young people
Article  (Accepted Version)
http://sro.sussex.ac.ukde Visser, R O, Graber, R, Hart, A, Abraham, C, Memon, A, Watten, P and Scanlon, T (2015) 
Using qualitative methods within a mixed-methods approach to developing and evaluating 
interventions to address harmful alcohol use among young people. Health Psychology, 34 (4). pp.  
349-360. ISSN 0278-6133 
This version is available from Sussex Research Online: http://sro.sussex.ac.uk/id/eprint/49716/
This document is made available in accordance with publisher policies and may differ from the 
published  version or from the version of record. If you wish to cite this item you are advised to 
consult the publisher’s version. Please see the URL above for details on accessing the published 
version. 
Copyright and reuse: 
Sussex Research Online is a digital repository of the research output of the University.
Copyright and all moral rights to the version of the paper presented here belong to the individual 
author(s) and/or other copyright owners.  To the extent reasonable and practicable, the material 
made available in SRO has been checked for eligibility before being made available. 
Copies of full text items generally can be reproduced, displayed or performed and given to third 
parties in any format or medium for personal research or study, educational, or not-for-profit 
purposes without prior permission or charge, provided that the authors, title and full bibliographic 
details are credited, a hyperlink and/or URL is given for the original metadata page and the 
content is not changed in any way. 

1 
 accepted for publication in Health Psychology  
cite as:  de Visser, R.O., Graber, R., Hart, A., Abraham, C., Memon, A., Watten, P. & Scanlon, T. (in 
press) Using qualitative methods within a mixed -methods approach to developing and evaluating 
interventions to address harmful alcohol use among young people. Heal th Psychology . 
note: final published version may vary 
 
 Using Qualitative Methods within a Mixed -Methods Approach to Developing and 
Evaluating Interventions to Address Harmful Alcohol Use among Young People  
Objective: This paper illustrates how qualitative methods can be used in  the development 
and evaluation of behavior change interventions. Although many campaigns advise young people to drink responsibly, few clarify how to convert this general advice into specific 
behavioral s trategies. Resilience -based approaches argue that treating young non-drinkers and 
moderate drinkers as “ experts” in responsible alcohol use may facilitate co -creation of 
acceptable interventions that focus on how to change behavior.  Methods: Four distinct 
phases of intervention development were linked to past research and future developments. Results: First , analysis of correlates of alcohol use using data from a survey of 1412 people 
aged 16-21 indicated that alcohol harm-reduction interventions should help young people to develop skills and strategies to resist alcohol . Second, Interpretative Phenomenological 
Analysis of 25 interviews  with people purposively-selected from among the survey sample 
identified general strategies and specific tactics used by y oung people to manage 
opportunities to drink. Third, insights from the first two phases and past qualitative research guided development of video resources to be use in school-based alcohol education to illustrate strategies and tactics for moderate- or non-use of alcohol. Fourth, 18 focus groups 
with students and teachers were used to evaluate the video: structured Thematic Analysis 
indicate d that after revision the video would be a valuable addition to school- based alcohol 
education. Conclusions: Findings from the four phases highlight the value of using different 
qualitative and  quantitative methods as part of a program of work designed to inform the 
development, refinement, and evaluation of health psychology interventions. 
Keywords:  intervention; qualitative; video; school; alcohol; peer education 
2 
 Qualitative methods that focus on lived experience may offer invaluable insight into young 
people’ s experiences of non -drinking and moderate drinking in a “binge drinking” youth 
culture (e.g., Conroy & de Visser, in press; Frederickson, Bakke & Dalum, 2012; Robertson et al., 2012). Strategic use of multiple qualitative methods may aid the development and evaluation of interventions that support young people to achieve and maintain moderate  levels of alcohol consumption, or to abstain from alcohol. The study reported here provides an illustrative case study.  
In recent decades, principles of social marketing have been applied with success in health 
psychology and public health (Gordon, McDermott, Stead & Angus, 2006). Unlike mass-media campaigns concerned solely with information provision/control, social marketing involves an integrated series of activities employed in an iterative and responsive manner to ensure that the message and the mode of delivery are meaningful and appealing (Cheng, Kotler & Lee, 2011; Gordon et al., 2006; Randolph & Viswanath, 2004). Key elements of social marketing include: population segmentation to identify a specific target group; use of quantitative and/or qualitative methods to understand people’s values and needs and to inform intervention development; an understanding of the principle of exchange and demonstration of appealing pay-offs from behaviour change; analysis of appropriate communication channels; formative evaluation of the intervention by the target audience 
during its development; and implementation and formal evaluation of the final revised 
intervention  
A systematic review concluded that social marketing interventions can reduce alcohol 
misuse, and included evidence that school- based social marketing can influence alcohol use 
among young people (Gordon et al., 2006). Furthermore, a recent systematic review indicated that videos can be an effective component of interventions, especially if they: are tailored to the target audience; use gain -framed messages that emphasize the benefits of changing 
behavior; and include modeling of desired behavior (Tuong, Larsen & Armstrong, 2014). That systematic review identified no studies that had included videos as a key component of interventions designed to address alcohol use among young people (Tuong et al., 2014). 
     
The aim of this paper is to illustrate how diffe rent modes of qualitative research can be 
integrated, and combined with quantitative methods in a work program designed to inform the development and revision of effective health psychology interventions.  
Young people and alcohol 
There is widespread concern about the health and social consequences of excessive alcohol consumption among young people - i.e., those aged 15-21 years (Babor et al., 2010). Much 
3 
 attention has been given to heavy episodic drinking (HED), also known as “binge drinking” 
(Herring, Berridge & Thom, 2008), which is associated with an increased risk of alcohol poisoning, accidents and injury, and being the victim or perpetrator of violence (Boles & Miotto, 2003; Cherpitel et al., 2003). Across developed countries, young people are the population segment most likely to report HED (White et al., 2011). However HED is not the only marker of problematic drinking, and it is important to consider subject definitions of drinking “ too much”.  
Many existing health promotion campaigns encourage young people to drink responsibly, 
but do not clarify how to convert this general advice into specific behavioral strategies or 
offer realistic models of behavior change (Gordon et al., 2006). One notable e xception to this 
in the UK is the National Health Service (NHS) “Change4Life ” campaign, which offers 
practical advice to individuals wishing to reduce their alcohol intake (NHS, 2012). The lack 
of attention to helping young people to identify and prepare for situations that may lead to heavy drinking is odd given that such skills are an important part of relapse prevention (Hendershot, 
Witkiewitz, George & Marlatt, 2011; Larimer, Palmer & Marlatt, 1999).  
In recent qualitative research with young people, public health initiatives have been 
criticized for focusing too much on physical risks and harms to health - which young people tend not to worry about - and not giving suf ficient attention to the pleasure arising from 
drinking – which is  important to young drinkers (de Visser, Wheeler, Abraham & Smith, 
2013; Fry, 2011; Harrison, Kelly, Lindsay, Advocat, & Hickey, 2011; Szmigin et al., 2008).   
Conventional campaigns also tend to focus on individual responsibility and ignore the 
group- based social nature of d rinking (de Visser et al., 2013; Fry, 2011; Harrison et al., 2011; 
Hutton, 2012; Jayne et al., 2010; Szmigin et al., 2011). Therefore, campaigns that target individual harms arising from HED may be dismissed as irrelevant, particularly given that many are perceived to employ a patronizing, paternalistic, or preaching tone (de Visser et al., 2013). Peer group drinking and drunkenness are important aspects of the social lives of many young people: the individual experience of intoxication is often accompanied by enhanced feelings of togetherness (Brown & Gregg, 2012; de Visser et al., 2013; Fry, 2011; Jayne et al., 2010; Livingstone, Young & Manstead, 2011; MacNeela & Bredin, 2011; Szmigin et al., 2011; Thurnell -Read, 2011). Furthermore, recent qualitative res earch has revealed that many 
young people believe that some negative aspects of drinking – such as caring for drunk 
friends, being cared for when drunk, and suffering through hangovers with friends – offer opportunities for strengthening interpersonal bonds (de Visser et al., 2013). Public health interventions should, therefore, address these important social motives.   
4 
 Behavioral Skills and Resilience  
Effective alcohol education is vital for ensuring that young people are equipped with the 
information and skills needed to enact informed healthy choices about alcohol (Department 
for Education, 2011). The National Institute for Health & Care Excellence (NICE: 2007) recommends “safer drinking” lessons for teenagers, based on evidence that such approaches are cost -effective (McKay et al., 2012). However, there is a lack of tested resources that teach 
or illustrate strategies or techniques to use to resist alcohol.  
The Information- Motivation -Behavioral Skills model (Fisher, Fisher, Williams & Malloy, 
1994) highlights the need not only to improve knowledge of the harms related to excessive alcohol use, but to develop skills to enable this knowledge to be put into practice. Possession of such skills is reflected in drink -refusal self -efficacy (DRSE), which is linked to reduced 
risk of harmful drinking (Atwell et al., 2011; Baldwin et al., 1993). 
A psychosocial resilience framework argues that it is important to develop skills, self -
confidence, and protective mechanisms to help people to manage challenging  situ ations and 
adversity (Hart et al., 2007). When applied to the current behavioral focus, the challenging  context is a youth “binge-drinking” culture, the required skills and self -confidence are 
conceptualized as DRSE, and the broader protective mechanisms include support for non- or moderate-drinking. (Johnson et al., 1998). A resilience approach moves beyond 
conceptualizing alcohol management skills solely as avoiding risky behaviors, and toward 
identifying protective mechanisms that support healthier patterns of alcohol use (Rutter, 1990).  The  resilience philosophy  underlying the research reported here argues that treating 
young non-drinkers and moderate drinkers as “ experts” in responsible drinking may facilitate 
co-creation of acceptable and feasible in terventions that focus on how to change behavior. 
This involves learning how young people successfully manage responsible alcohol use in varied social situations, and using what is learnt to develop tailored interventions.   
Peer Influence and Peers as Educators 
Treating young people as a valuable resource (rather than simply as a problem group) is central to peer education. In developing health promotion materials for alcohol use, it is important to incorporate peer influences, because perceived peer behav ior influences young 
people’s alcohol use (Borsari & Carey, 2003; França et al., 2010). Furthermore, young people who hold more negative perceptions of non-drinkers tend to report heavier alcohol consumption (Regan & Morrison, 2013). It is therefore important to present positive images of moderate - and non-drinkers. 
Peer educators can be credible “opinion leaders ” who enact behaviors that their peers 
5 
 would seek to emulate (Kelly et al., 1992). This approach has been applied with some success 
in school- based  peer -education interventions for health behaviors (e.g., Starkey et al., 2009). 
Peer-delivered health education may be perceived as more appealing than teacher-delivered 
health education (Stephenson et al., 2004), and may address young people’ s views that  
alcohol education tends to be patronizing or paternalistic (de Visser et al., 2013) 
Peer education can also provide opportunities for young people to develop a critical 
consciousness of how socially constructed norms place their health at risk, and encour age the 
development of alternative norms (Campbell & MacPhail, 2002). This perspective can be aligned with a resilience framework that highlights the importance of developing not only individual capacities , but also broader protective mechanisms including micro- and macro-
social support for non- or moderate -drinking. For example, the school environment can be an 
important influence on student health (Bonell et al., 2013). 
The value of qualitative methods for developing and evaluation interventions 
As indicated above, qualitative methods should be a key component of interventions 
developed according to social marketing principles (Cheng et al., 2011; Gordon et al., 2006). They can also provide information tha t is useful for the evaluation of the efficacy and 
acceptability of interventions, to determine whether proposed new interventions are perceived by young people and health educators to be useful, feasible, and credible, and can be used to 
elicit feedback t o guide the revision of intervention materials (Lewin, Glenton & Oxman, 
2009; MacPherson & McKie, 2010). Qualitative methods can also be combined with 
quantitative methods in process evaluation in trials of new interventions to examine the views of people who deliver and/or receive the intervention, and to investigate contextual factors that may affect intervention implementation and intervention efficacy in different sites (Oakley et al., 2006). Qualitative process evaluation can help to determine why effe ctive 
interventions work, and whether less successful interventions are inherently flawed in conceptual terms, or are well -conceived but badly delivered. 
This paper 
The aim of this paper is to provide an illustration of how multiple qualitative methods can be combined and used within a resilience framework to develop and evaluate strengths- based 
behavior change interventions to prevent harmful alcohol use among young people. The 
research involved four distinct phases within a continuum linking insights from past qualitative research described above to future developments (Figure 1). The program of new work described here entailed the rigorous application of different qualitative methods in different phases and for different research purposes. The sections below describe a program 
6 
 of research designed to reduce alcohol consumption and alcohol-related harm among young 
people by enhancing DRSE and psychosocial resilience in a heavy-drinking culture. The 
focus was not limited to HED, but included subject definitions of drinking “too much”. The goal was to produce materials for use in schools and to determine their appropriateness for the target audience of 15 -17 years olds.  The principles and processes described here could be 
applied to other health behaviors that are also an important part of young people's social lives such as smoking, and sexual behavior (Cheng et al, 2011). 
> Figure 1 <  
Phase 1  
A cross- sectional survey was conducted to identify patterns of alcohol consumption and their 
correlates among young people. Findings informed subsequent phases by: determining 
whether enhancing DRSE was a useful focus for the intervention ; informing the development 
of the topic guide for Phase 2  interviews , and enabling purposive sampling of interview ees.  
Methods 
An online questionnaire was completed by 776 women and 642 men aged 16-21 living in South-East England.  Full details of the methods and s ample demographics are reported 
elsewhere (Author, 2014a). L inks to the survey homepage were distributed through: emails 
containing a link to the survey distributed in two universities; advertisements on the websites 
of 17 secondary schools; and distribution of promotional cards at 4 young people's services.  
Respondents indicated whether they had ever consumed alcohol. Those who had then 
indicated whether they had consumed alcohol in the last year. Those who had then completed 
the 10- item Alcohol Use Disorders Identification Test (Babor, Higgins-Biddle, Saunders & 
Monteiro, 2001). AUDIT scores and the two alcohol use history questions were used to allocate respondents to one of four alcohol use groups: non- drinkers (5%), former -drinkers 
(5%), low -risk drinkers (46%), and hazardous drinkers (44%). 
Participants used 7 -point scales (“strongly disagree ” - “strongly disagree ”) to respond to 
the statement “Concerns about my health exert a strong influence over my use of alcohol ” (de 
Visser & McDonnell, 2012).  
DRSE  was assessed with 16 items (Young et al., 1991). Respondents used 7-point scales 
(“very difficult” - “very easy ”) to indicate their ability to refuse alcohol in 16 scenarios (e.g., 
“When someone offers me a drink ”), with higher scores indicating greater D RSE (
α = .94). 
Peer alcohol use was assessed as the mean of 4 items created for this study ( α = .86).  
Participants used 7 -point scales (“None of them ” - “All of them ”) to indicate the proportion 
7 
 of [their friends / other people their age] who regularly [d rink alcohol / get drunk]. 
Respondents used 7- point scales (“ not at all”  - “extremely ”) to indicate their belief in the 
effectiveness of eight alcohol control strategies chosen on the basis of variations in evidence 
of their effectiveness (Anderson, Chisholm & Fuhr, 2009) and differences in their focus on individuals or the environment: Enforce the law against serving drunk people; Strictly monitor late -night licensed premises; Teach people skills for resisting pressure to drink; 
Restrict late -night alcohol sales; Increase the price of alcohol; Reduce the number of outlets 
that sell alcohol; Ban alcohol sponsorship of sporting events; Raise the legal drinking age . 
The sample reflected the population in terms of ethnicity (Brighton & Hove Local 
Information Service, 2011) and alcohol use (Office for National Statistics [ONS], 2012), but the sam pling strategy meant that it over-represented students (ONS, 2013).  
Results  
Multivariate multinomial logistic regression analysis indicated that membership of the four alcohol use groups was predicted by DRSE (p < .01), concern about health effects of alcohol use (p < .01), and perceived peer alcohol use (p < .01) . This indicated that moderate drinking 
may be encouraged by: 1) raising concern about the health effects of alcohol; 2) challenging misperceived peer norms for heavy drinking; and 3) developing s kills to resist personal or 
peer-influenced impulses to drink (Author, 2014a). Furthermore, when participants were 
asked which alcohol control strategies they believed would be effective, there was support for 
teaching people alcohol refusal skills:  only enforcing the law against serving drunk people 
received significantly greater support (Author, 2014b). These findings suggest a need to 
identify, understand, and enhance alcohol refusal skills and strategies.  
Phase 2  
In Phase 2, non-drinkers and moderate-drinkers were treated as a valuable source of 
information about how to successfully manage situations that provide opportunities to drink excessively. Experiential qualitative methods were applied to: (1) understand how young 
people experience non- and mode rate-drinking; and (2) identify choices and practices that 
participants had found to be successful. Data collection and analysis were designed to inform Phase 3  by creating a psychosocial framework for the experience of moderate drinking and 
by generating evidence-based content for the intervention materials.  
Methods 
Semi -structured interviews lasting 40 to 110 minutes were conducted with 25 young people 
purposively sampled from Phase 1 participants. The sample was designed to include sufficient numbers of: men and women: non-drinkers and moderate drinkers; and respondents 
8 
 above or below the legal alcohol purchase age  of 18 years . People older than the target age 
group for the intervention (i.e., those aged 18-21) were included to allow analysis of: illicit 
and legal drinking; different drinking contexts; and how participants' understanding of their alcohol use changed over time. This allowed examination of the key issues as reported by the target group, and in the reflections and reminiscences of slightl y older people. Interviews 
were grounded in participants' experiences of alcohol use and non- use. They explored 
motivations and influences related to (not) drinking; impact of (not) drinking on identity and social relationships; and use of specific strateg ies for non-drinking and moderate-drinking. 
Interviews were conducted by the second author (a 28 year old white woman) at the host university or the participant's host institution, transcribed verbatim, and anonymized.  
Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis (Smith, Flowers & Larkin, 2009) was conducted 
because it focuses on subjective experience and meaning -making and was therefore ideal for 
identifying advice on how  to resist temptation/pressure to drink. Analysis  focused on 
participants ’ experiences of  implicit and explicit strategies concerning their own alcohol 
consumption, including thoughts, feelings, and behavior. It progressed iteratively through 
commonly accepted stages in IPA (Smith et al., 2009). Initial coding by the second author identified 104 codes that reflected distinct phenomena or experiences. These provided the basis of the interpretative phase of analysis : they were aggregated into six conceptually 
coherent themes which themselves clustered around a superordinate theme of the “ sweet 
spot”.  
In IPA, assessment of reliability is not prescriptively quantified but instead reflects an 
iterative process in which all interpretation is clearly grounded in the raw data through procedures such as checking earlier transcripts against later analysis to consistent coding of themes. Yardley ’s (2000) four criteria for validity and quality were operationalized in a 
manner suggested by Smith et al. (2009). Sensitivity to context  was demonstrated in our 
conceptualization of young people’ s alcohol use as a multiply -determined psychosocial 
phenomenon, and by our reflexivity in relation to data collection  and analysis. Given that we 
were situated within the same broad cultural context as the participants, our interpretations 
will have been influenced by our own subjectivities. Throughout, we reflexively engaged in iterative processes of “setting aside” and “engaging with” our subjectiv ities by reflecting on 
our own experiences and interpretations and how these influenced the analytic process (Shaw, 2010). C ommitmen t and rigor  were promoted by having a selection of transcripts 
independently coded by the first author and second author to ensure that the interpretative 
process and outcomes were consistent . Transparency and coherence  were demonstrated by 
9 
 explaining how themes were generated, presenting them in a clear way, and providing 
evidence to sow how these themes were grounded in the data. Impact and importance  were 
demonstrated by showing how the analysis fed into intervention development in Phase 3 . 
Results  
A detailed presentation of these findings is beyond the scope of this paper, but will be available elsewhere. Below we illustrate some key findings, and  focus on the broad strategies 
and specific techniques identified by respondents. Analysis identified six major themes 
clustered around a central concept of the “ Sweet Spot ” of moderate drinking, exemplified by 
the following quote:
 
It’s important to … find that kind of sweet spot, between too sober and too drunk … 
getting too drunk always tends to end kind of badly, but I … like to get drunk enough - 
open and friendly, but, kind of, sensible enough to not do anything too stupid … there's 
something like satisfying about knowing that you're not drunk enough to do something, 
but, you're still, having a good time. [John, 18+, moderate]  
John described  the importance of knowing how alcohol affects him, and of knowing how 
to drink in ways that allow him to maximize the positive aspects of alcohol consumption and 
minimize the detrimental effects. His use of the phrase “ sweet spot” neatly summarized both 
an experience and a desired (and desirable) state. The “ Sweet Spot ” (Figure 2) was defined as 
an experience or frame of mind in which  an individual: feels good physically; feels in control; feels an authentic sense of belonging; feels satisfied with his/her choices to drink or not to drink; enjoys him/herself in drinking situations;  and feels like him/herself when drinking. These themes related both to immediate experiences during drinking situations and to longer-term alcohol use. The central concept and its underpinning thematic dimensions represented broad strategies that could be enacted via specific tactics used to manage pressure/temptation to drink excessively.  
> Figure 2 <  
For example, analysis identified the importance of “feeling like you can be who you are” .  
Participants tended to value acting in ways that reflect who they are, regardless of the amount of alcohol consumed. However, they also sometimes experienced a disjunction between “real” choices made when sober and choices made “ because I was drunk”. This could be 
experienced positively as greater confidence or sociability: “you get sort of really happy. You're up for dancing and stuff ” (Heather, 16-17, moderate). Nevertheless, many had also 
experienced a negative, jarring disjunction between behavior when drinking and authentic beliefs.  Like other interviewees, Iris (18+ moderate) noted that this disjunction prompted questions about the way she drank the way she did, especially when it led to interpersonal 
10 
 conflict. She experienced a tension between her feelings about whether she needs alcohol, 
and the effects of alcohol on what she values for herself and her relationships with others. This resulted in her deciding to reduce her alcohol intake:
 
I thought “Really? Do I want this [argument] to be happening?”, and then to be feeling 
really low … it's not that you become dependent, but sometimes – especially I think if 
you're a shy person or you lack a bit of self-confidence being with people – it's just like 
there easy thing to do ...[but] something which is meant to be fun, it's not any more.  
These findings could be translated to interventions as the theme “feeling like you can be who you are”, to reflect the broad strategy whereby individuals ensure that the choices they make while drinking are the ones they would want to make when sober. This suggests a need to support young people to be self-reflective using non- judgmental techniques. Specific tactics 
to allow this that were evident in the data included: “ask yourself if you want to meet the drunk version of yourself ”. 
Phase 3  
Phase 3 entailed developing a video-based resource to promote responsible drinking among young people. The 11 -minute pilot video “ Hitting the Sweet Spot” was designed to illustrate 
successful alcohol management strategies ( www.youtube.com/watch?v=7iGECfYahow
). The 
target audience of 15-17 year  old students and teachers of alcohol education was chosen 
because school -based education would provide contact with a broad range of young people at 
a time when many begin to use alcohol (ONS, 2012). The video was not designed to change behavior directly. It was anticipated that the video and associated lesson plans would be used within alcohol education to prompt individuals and groups to think critically about personal and social expectations and practices related to alcohol use. 
Resource Development  
The content and structure of the video were designed in line with best practice in health 
psychology and behavior change theory , and recent qualitative research into psychosocial 
aspects of alcohol use (Brown & Gregg, 2012; de Visser et al., 2013; Jayne et al., 2010; Livingstone et al., 2011; MacNeela & Bredin, 2011; Szmigin et al., 2011). The approach 
involved several different t echniques identified in Abraham and Michie’s (2008) taxonomy of 
behavior change intervention techniques - providing information about others ’ approval; 
prompting identification of barriers; providing general encouragement; modeling behavior; 
and providing opportunities for social comparison; providing information about 
consequences; teaching use of prompts/cues; and planning social support. It also employed 
the two aspects of peer education noted earlier: using peers as models and opinions leaders (Kelly et al, 1992); and encouraging young people to think critically about how their own 
11 
 behavior is influenced by a “binge drinking” youth culture (Campbell & MacPhaill, 2002). 
The focus of the video was directed by the phenomenological themes identified in Phase 2, 
with each theme represented by a video segment (e.g., “Feeling like you can be who you 
are”). The strategies and tactics presented in the video were adapted from Phase 2 study findings (e.g., by creating an composite account of a non-drinker’ s experien ce of going to 
university). Phase 2 participants were invited to become actors in the video, and were invited to provide feedback on the video messages and production process. 
Qualitative research has indicated that: long -term health effects are not sufficiently 
motivating to young people; extreme/shocking outcomes are dismissed as unlikely; a preaching/patronizing tone is counter -productive; and campaigns are often seen to be too 
obviously artificial/staged (de Visser et al., 2013; Fry, 2011; Harrison et a l., 2011). Therefore, 
the video: used an informal “behind- the-scenes” style and a lighthearted tone to reduce 
defensiveness; presented non- drinkers and moderate drinkers as socially competent; and 
modeled effective strategies. An introductory voice-over ma de it clear that the “ actors” in the 
video were young people who had participated in Phase 2 or other volunteers to help viewers to perceive the strategies as credible and feasible (Stephenson et al., 2004). The sixth author guided development of the video in light of his substantial experience of producing videos for late adolescents and young adult audiences. 
Resource Description  
The video was structured with a brief introduction, segments corresponding to three of the six identified themes in Figure 2 (f eeling that you can be who you are; feeling good in the body; 
feeling safe and secure), and a conclusion reiterating the “ Sweet Spot ” message. Each 
segment used a combination of monologues, conversations and text, and employed both humorous and more serious tones to discuss a range of topics. The video included brief use of key statistics to highlight the prevalence of uncontrolled drinking (e.g., “2 in 5 young people who got drunk in the last month didn't mean to”), rather than emphasizing health concerns or 
extreme/unlikely outcomes. Production of the video was accompanied by development of ideas for how to incorporate the videos in lesson plans for in- class use with secondary school 
students. This was carried out in consultation with school-based health e ducation experts with 
the aim of evaluating these suggestions in Phase 4.  
Phase 4  
Phase 4 was a qualitative evaluation of the video developed in Phase 3. Whereas Phase 2 had an experiential focus and used individual interviews to generate suitable data, i n this phase 
focus group discussions were used to generate: opinions of the video; suggestions for how to 
12 
 improve it; and to generate suggestions from students and teachers as to how a revised 
version of the video might be deployed in health education in l ine with concerns about 
alcohol education highlighted in past research (de Visser et al., 2013; Jayne et al., 2010; Szmigin et al., 2011) and in Phase 2 . Focus groups were considered the appropriate 
methodology because they allow examination of interaction between research participants as well as similarities and differences in opinions, and because of the project's focus on drinking as a social phenomenon (Kitzinger, 1994). Focus groups allowed examination of consensus and disagreement about the overall concept and specific elements. Analysis of participants ’ 
reception of the “ sweet spot ” concept also served as an indicator of the validity and 
transferability of the Phase 2 findings (Yardley, 2000).  
Methods 
Focus groups were conducted to elicit opinions about the pilot video and lesson plans from key stakeholders. Data collection was carried out in five schools selected to include urban and semi -rural schools, government and independent schools, and a Pupil R eferral Unit 
(PRU: a government educational institution for children who are excluded, ill, or otherwise unable to attend other schools). Thirteen group discussions ranging in size from 3-9 participants were conducted with students aged 15-17. Five focus groups ranging in size from 2-5 participants were conducted with teachers: these included Personal, Social& Health 
Education (PSHE) specialists, teachers of science and health promotion, as well as head 
teachers and deputy heads. The discussions were facili tated by a 28 year old white women 
and/or a 40 year old white man.    
Participants were shown the video in a classroom setting, and invited to give their opinions 
in several domains:    Content: understanding of, and reactions to, the “ sweet spot” message; perceived utility of 
the message and videos;  
 Style: perceptions of the behind-the-scenes approach, visual style, and use of non- actors  
 Implementation: compari son to existing alcohol education resources; beliefs about how 
the video could be used with other classroom activities.  
 Improvements: including suggested revisions; and preferred mode of delivery  
Focus groups were audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. They then underwent structured Thematic Analysis (Braun & Clarke, 2006), a method chosen to  enab le identification of 
themes related to the four domains noted above, and suggestions for improving the video. The second author analyzed group discussions involving students. The first author analyzed group discussions involving PSHE teachers and verified the second author’s coding of 
13 
 transcripts. An iterative analytic process identified codes on the basis of prevalence and 
relevance, and these were grouped into pre- identified themes according to the four domains 
identified above to ensure a balance between  pre-identified topics and emergent issues (Braun 
& Clarke, 2006; Fereday & Muir-Cochrane, 2006). 
As in Phase 2, Yardley ’s (2000) validity and quality criteria were applied. Sensitivity to 
context  was demonstrated in our awareness of young people’ s alcohol use as a legal, social, 
and health issue, and by our reflexivity during data collection and analysis. Because we 
shared the same broad cultural context as the teachers and students, we reflexivel y engaged in 
processes of “setting aside” and “engaging with” our subjectivities and reflecting on how our own beliefs and experiences may have influenced the analytic process (Shaw, 2010). We also 
critically reflected on how student participants sometimes enacted social pressures and expectations addressed by the video. Commitment and rigor  were promoted by the first and 
second authors conferring after conducting initial independent coding to ensure a consistent 
approach to analysis and interpretation. Transparency and coherence  were demonstrated by 
explaining how themes were generated, presenting them in a clear way, and providing evidence to s how how these themes were grounded in the data. Impact and importance  were 
apparent in students ’ and teachers’ responses to the video and their suggestions for how to 
improve it.  
Results   
The data provided valuable information about responses to the video and identified several aspects to address to ensure that it would be acceptable and useful in schools.  
Content . The content was understood by the student participants, who considered the “sweet 
spot” a realistic, useful behavioral framework: they consistently reflected the message that “you don’t need to drink that much to have a good time” (F student, school 1). As intended, 
they used social and personal frames for determining the sweet spot, as opposed to physical health messages. The video was seen to address DRSE and provide meaningful support for making healthy choices: 
 
I think it was just sort of more like: “Think about it yourself and make your own 
decisions about how you want to drink and what you want to drink ”, but sort of advising 
about how to ( M student, school 2)  
Young people generally believed that the video realistically addressed important soc ial 
contexts of drinking, contributors to drinking practices, and consequences of excess. They valued this approach as realistic because it incorporates real experiences, and acknowledges perceived benefits of drinking. 
14 
 Young people noted that the ease of implementing the strategies in the video would 
depend upon the nature of drinking spaces, prior experience, and friendship groups. Some felt 
that younger adolescents needed personal experience of testing or exceeding alcohol intake limits in order to “then  know when your balance is” (F teacher, school 3), and felt this would 
diminish message utility, whereas others found the “sweet spot” a positive message for young people to aspire to that should be introduced before drinking habits became established. Several teachers questioned whether all young people would have the maturity to apply the 
principles and suggested a need for more “how to” advice, suggesting that they needed “more 
tips on how to not feel pressured by your peers ” (F teacher, PRU) . 
Focus groups with teachers suggested that the video could be a valuable addition to 
alcohol education to empower students to enact healthy choices about alcohol use:
 
It was such a brilliant thing to hear, you know. That's a really positive look – Wow! You 
got something back by not [drinking exces sively] ( F teacher, school 3)  
Style . Students generally felt that the design, narrative and structural elements of the video 
enhanced its believability, realism and usefulness. They compared it favorably to existing resources believed to feature uncontextualized facts, messages of abstinence, and situations that are “almost so extreme that you just thought: 'that’s not going to happen.'” (M student, school 3). The video was perceived to engage with young people in a w ay that “doesn’t like 
make you rebel - in a way it just makes you, like, understand it more” ( F student, school 3) 
through its use of other young people, upbeat tone, and emphasis on drinking in moderation:
 
There’ s a kind of really good … social aspect to it, so not so much about the facts and 
statistics but the fact that they said friends - so you can go out with friends and have a 
good time without getting drunk, or you can go out with friends and make sure that you 
have friends with you - so have a really good social aspect to it ( F student, school 2)  
Teachers also liked the “friendly ”, informal, behind-the- scenes style:  
The fact that you used real people is brilliant ( F teacher, PRU)  
However, some teachers and students felt that the people in the video sometimes seemed 
“awkward”, and the interactions “staged”. They acknowledged, however, that it is difficult to get past the “contrived” nature of video production. Implementation. Students felt that video addressed young people’s lived experiences in a more compelling and useful way than existing approaches, and addressed a need for 
resources that could help them to make healthy choices. Students and teachers consistently suggested that the video would be best used to prompt and/or focus discussions of opinions, strategies and capacities in small -group collaborative learning contexts: 
 
I think like a discussion, talk about the best way to like go to a party without getting 
drunk. Like, here are some examples, and then show them the video. ( M student, 
15 
 school 2)  
Students' and teachers' preference for using the video to prompt reflection and prepare for 
social situations matched a psychosocial resilience -based approach: rather than simply being 
told something, students would be actively encouraged to develop the ir own strategies. 
Although teachers understood and appreciated the “ sweet spot” message, several noted that 
the harm reduction message may be “quite hard ” to use because it could be seen to entail 
encouragement of illegal activity:  
I wouldn't want you telling my Year 9 or Year 10 [13-15 year old] actually to go and 
drink to their sweet spot (F teacher, school 1)  
Teachers also noted that video-based discussion may lead to students disclosing 
information about illegal activity, and that teachers would have to “ be careful” with this. 
Although there was no firm consensus on an appropriate target age, participants suggested 
that the video was best aimed at 15-17 year olds as part of efforts to prevent excessive consumption among people who are exploring drinking but have not yet established routines.  
Students and teachers felt that in addition to having copies of materials for in -class use, it 
would be useful to have a website This could facilitate in school use across multiple classes to stimulate group work, and would also enable individual use outside of class time. Improvements.  Some teachers suggested that more attention could be given to describing the 
negative consequences of heavy drinking, not just alluding to these. It was suggested that stories about  bad experiences would help viewers relate to them because “ we all love a story ” 
(female teacher, school 1) and such stories would boost the perceived “honesty” of the videos. Similarly, some students wanted to hear more personal accounts of the negative impact of excessive drinking upon characters’ personal and social lives. Many students also expressed a desire for more details of how the people in the video lived out the healthy choices they talked about on screen. One option suggested by students would be to provide brief background stories for each person on the website.
 
Like if someone, one of the people in that told, like, a really, like, story about exactly what 
happened to them and stuff, then it’ d probably, like, draw you in. You’ d probably go away  
and, like, remember it, nod, and think, “Oh, that’ s really bad” (F student, College 2)  
Students and teachers suggested that in order to effectively target under-18 year olds, 
future resources should include discussion of experiences in informal drinking s paces such as 
house parties, parks and streets rather than bars . They also suggested that the video should 
include a broader range of people than the perceived “ educated ”, “middle- class” young 
people in the video. Students and teachers felt that the segments involving two or more 
16 
 people could be made to seem less awkward by including real friendship groups talking about 
positive shared experiences of non-drinking or moderate alcohol use. 
It was clear from these findings that a revised version of the video and associated lesson 
plans would be a valuable addition to school- based alcohol education materials.  
Discussion  
This paper has illustrated h ow different qualitative methods may be used as part of a 
coordinated systematic approach the development and refinement of health psychology interventions ( Kotler & Lee, 2011). Qualitative methods contributed to the development of 
the videos in three key ways. First, the results of recent qualitative research highlighted a need for interventions that better address the concerns and motivations of young people and that use messages and media that are appealing to them ( Brown & Gregg, 2012; de Visser et 
al., 2013; Fry, 2011; Harrison et al., 2011; Hutton, 2012; Jayne et al., 2010; Livingstone, Young & Manstead, 2011; Szmigin et al., 2011). 
Second, use of experiential qualitative methods in Phase 2 facilitated identification of 
specific examples of how young people can put into practice generic advice to “drink 
responsibly”, and thereby address an absence in current public health interventions. The concept of the “ Sweet Spot ” encapsulated an experiential understanding of young people’ s 
moderate- and non-drinking, and offered a substantive definition of how moderate drinking 
may be experienced and enacted. This concept and its related associated behavioral strategies: 
address young people’ s concerns and resilience capacities as they navigate social drinking 
situations; specifies targets for health promotion efforts; and generates realistic goals and guidance.  An important aspect of the Sweet Spot is that it is subjectively defined and may be an important complement to tactics focusing on consumption (e.g., monitoring or counting “units ” or “standard drinks ”) or avoidance of alcohol. The Phase 2 interviews provided rich 
examples of behavioral strategies and tactics used successfully by young people which were then used to inform development of the video in Phase 3.  
The use of qualitative methods in Phase 4 allowed assessment of the likely classroom 
utility of the videos developed in Phase 3, and provided valuable suggestions for how the materials could be improved to make them more acceptable to, and useful for, young people and teachers. Students and teachers felt that the video could make a valuable addition to existing alcohol education resources, and that lessons involving group work could be planned around the video content. An important aspect of this evaluation was to determine the likely acceptability of the intervention to schools given that the intervention was based on a harm reduction philosophy that does not necessarily advocate abstinence (Midford et al., 2012; 
17 
 Lento n & Midford, 1996). Notably, s ome teachers questioned whether all parents and schools 
would feel comfortable endorsing the “ Sweet Spot ” message: some may consider it to be an 
invitation to inexperience d young people to drink in potentially harmful ways ( although the 
“Sweet Spot ” message does encourage personal and group safety). The apparent ambivalence 
in the message reflects ambivalence toward alcohol -related harm observed at the individual 
level (e.g., de Visser & Smith, 2007a), and at a broader social level (Babor et al., 2010). 
However, it is important to note that many parents may respond positively to approaches to alcohol education that are not solely focused on abstinence (Gilligan & Kypri, 2012). The 
acceptance of harm reduction approaches may reflect awareness that underage drinking is not simply a legal issue, but rather an issue that has implications for young people’s physical and psychosocial well-being.  
I
t is not anticipated that the “ Sweet Spot ” intervention will be appropriate for all conte xts, 
or that it will be a panacea for problematic alcohol use among young people. It is therefore important to consider where it might fit within broader alcohol control stra tegies (Anderson 
et al., 2009). I nterventions that target individual behaviour - so-called “ downstream” 
approaches - tend to have less impact on risk behavior than do “upstream ” approaches that 
focus on policy and regulation (Anderson et al., 2009; Hoek & Jones, 2011). Although the interv ention described and evaluated here focused on the social context and  individual 
capacities - and could be considered more “ upstream” than other “downstream ” approaches 
(Hoek & Jones, 2011) - it would still need to incorporated with more “ upstream approaches. 
Here it is worth noting that the Phase 1 data revealed broad support among young people for a range of population- level policies as well as individual -level strategies (Author, 2014b). 
To summarize the mixed method approach applied here, the quantitative data generated in 
Phase 1 confirmed the potential impact of an intervention designed to enhance DRSE , 
informed the focus of the interviews conducted in Phase 2, and provided the purposive sample of interviewees for these . The qualitative data generated in Phase 2 revea1ed the importance of the “sweet spot” concept and provided experience- based content for the “sweet 
spot” video developed in Phase 3. The qualitative data generated in Phase 4 confirmed the potential utility of the “sweet spot” video resource, and provided ideas for how to improve the resource and how best to incorporate it in alcohol education. Using the findings of Phase 2 to develop the intervention ensured that strategies were grounded in the lived experience of the target audience. By treating participants as “experts”, experiential methods allowed the 
identification of strategies, tactics and tensions unanticipated by other approaches. Young people were also treated as experts by including them in the presentation  of the intervention. 
18 
 As suggested in Phase 4, this maximized the applicability of the intervention to a target 
audience of peers (Kelly et al., 1992; Starkey et al., 2009). There is a confluence between resilience-based approaches that seek to promote change by nurturing young people’ s 
strengths, and experiential qualitative methods that provide analytical space for identifying, theorizing and exploiting those strengths. 
The four phases described here reflected social marketing approaches ( Kotle r & Lee, 
2011) and were designed to lead to future work to revise and finalize the video, and to develop lesson plans and materials needed for best use of the video in classrooms (Figure 1). The video was developed to include a number of the techniques identified in Abraham and Michie’s (2008) taxonomy of behavior change intervention techniques, including: providing information about others ’ approval; prompting identification of barriers; modeling behavior; 
and planning social support. It also employed two important aspects of peer education: using peers as opinions leaders and models in relation to moderate alcohol use (Kelly et al, 1992); and encouraging young people to think critically about their own behavior in a “binge drinking” youth culture (Campbell & MacPhaill, 2002).  
Although this paper has argued for research programs that combine methods, it must be 
noted that mixed-method research can produce epistemological tensions between methods based on different philosophical foundations (Denzin & Lincoln, 2005). However, applied 
health researchers may prioritize a pragmatic approach to finding out what works, and treat 
research methods more as tools or techniques than strict epistemological frameworks (Denzin & Lincoln, 2005; Tashakkori & Teddlie, 2003). A pragmatic approach suggests that methods should be combined in ways that exploit their strengths and acknowledge their limitations (Greene & Caracelli, 1997). This requires expertise across methods to prevent inappropriate extension of findings or linkages between phases, but yields the benefits of a multi-dimensional research program targeting different aspects of intervention development. 
 Funding has been secured to conduct the first phases of the “future work” identified in 
Figure 1. Such  work is required to evaluate the efficacy of the intervention (as opposed to the 
earlier stages of evaluating whether the intervention concept was feasible).  First, the video is 
being revised based on Phase 4 findings. E xisting scenes have been revised or deleted , and 
new scenes are being added so that the video addresses all six thematic components of the “Sweet Spot”. Lesson plans, taking into account Phase 4 findings  are being developed in collaboration with a health education expert. A website will be developed to host the videos and lesson plans for use within and outside of class time. Second, a feasibility study will be conducted to verify methods of data collection, confirm expected response rates, and identify 
19 
 any issues related to intervention delivery that require modification before a full trial. It is 
important to note that the data collection and analysis - and therefore the materials that were 
developed - were context -specific. The findings reported here and the intervention ma terials 
that were developed may not necessarily be applicable in other contexts without thorough 
testing of the appropriateness of the message and the medium ( Kotler & Lee, 2011).  
There is a need for interventions that help young people to put into practice advice to 
choose healthy behaviors. The approach to developing, refining, and evaluating health promotion materials described in this paper -  i.e., based on identifying which behavioral 
strategies and interventions young people find to be acceptable and effective - could be applied to other social behaviors that have important health consequences, such as smoking, and sexual risk behavior. The material presented here highlights the integral role of 
qualitative methods in coordinated structured approaches to developing and refining 
interventions that can make a difference to young people’ s health behavior.  
References  
Abraham, C. & Michie S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in 
interventions. Health Psychology , 27, 379 -387. doi:10.1037/0 278-6133.27.3.379 
Anderson, P., Chisholm, D., Fuhr, D.C. (2009). Effectiveness and cost -effectiveness of policies and 
programmes to reduce the harm caused by alcohol. Lancet , 373, 2234– 2246.  doi: 10.1016/S0140-
6736(09)60744-3.  
Babor, T.F., Caetano, R., Casswell, S, Edwards, G., Giesbrecht, N., ... Rossow, I. (2010) Alcohol: 
No Ordinary Commodity Research and Public Policy (2nd ed) . Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Babor, T.F., Higgins -Biddle, J.C., Saunders, J.B., & Monteiro, M.G. (2001).  The Alcohol Use 
Disorders Identification Test: Guidelines for Use in Primary Care (2nd Edition).  Geneva: World 
Health Organization.  
Boles, S.M., & Miotto, K. (2003). Substance abuse and violence: A review of the literature. 
Aggression & Violent Behavior , 8, 155–174. doi:10.1016/S1359- 1789(01)00057-X 
Bonell, C., Parry, W., Wells, H., Jamal, F., Fletcher, A., Harden, A., Thomas, J., Campbell, R., 
Petticrew, M., Murphy, S., Whitehead, M. & Moore, L. (2013). The effects of the school environment 
on student health: A systematic review of multi-level studies. Health & Place, 21, 180 -191. doi: 
10.1016/j.healthplace.2012.12.001  
Borsari, B. & Carey, K.B. (2003).  Descriptive and injunctive norms in college drinking: a meta -
analytic integration. Journal of Studies on Alcohol , 64, 331 -341.  
Braun, V ., & Clarke, V . (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology , 3, 77–101. 
Brighton & Hove  Local Information Service (2011). Profile library . Online resource available at 
http://www.bhlis.org/profiles/ (last visited on 12/02/2013).  
Brown, R., & Gregg, M. (2012). The Pedagogy of Regret: Facebook, binge drinking and young 
women. Continuum , 26,357 -369. doi:10.1080/10304312.2012.665834   
Campbell, C. & MacPhail, C. (2002) Peer Education, Gender and the Development of Critical 
Consciousness. Social Science & Medicine, 55, 331- 345. 
Cheng, H. Kotler, P. & Lee, N.R. (2011). Social Marketing for Public Health: Global Trends and 
Success Stories. Sudbury, MA: Jones & Barlett.  
20 
 Cherpitel, C.J., Bond, J., Ye, Y ., Borges, G., MacDonald, S., & Giesbrecht, N. (2003). A cross -
national meta -analysis of alcohol and injury. Addiction , 98, 1277– 1286.  doi:10.1046/j.1360-
0443.2003.00459.x  
Conroy, D. & de Visser, R.O. (in press). ‘Man up! ’: Discursive constructions of non-drinkers 
among UK undergraduates . Journal of Health Psychology . doi:10.1177/1359105312463586  
de Visser, R.O. & McDonnell, E.J. (2012). “ That’s OK. He’ s a guy ”: A mixed -methods study of 
gender double -standards for  alcohol use. Psychology & Health , 27, 618- 639. 
doi:10.1080/08870446.2011.617444  
de Visser, R.O. & Smith, J.A. (2006). Mister in between: a case study of masculine identity and 
health -related behaviour. Journal of Health Psychology , 11, 685 -695. doi: 
10.1177/1359105306066624 
de Visser, R.O. & Smith, J.A. (2007a). Young men men’ s ambivalence toward alcohol. Social 
Science & Medicine, 64, 350 -362. doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2006.09.010  
de Visser, R.O. & Smith, J.A. (2007b). Alcohol consumption and masculine identity among young 
men. Psychology & Health , 22, 595- 614. doi: 10.1080/14768320600941772  
de Visser, R.O., Smith, A.M.A. & Richters, J. (2005). Can we generalise to the broader population 
from studies of sexual behaviour among university students? Australian &  New Zealand Journal of 
Public Health , 29, 436- 441. doi:10.1111/j.1467-842X.2005.tb00223.x  
de Visser, R.O., Wheeler, Z., Abraham, S.C.S. & Smith, J.A. (2013). 'Drinking is our modern way 
of bonding': young people's beliefs about interventions to encourage moderate drinking. Psychology 
& Health, 28, 1460-1480. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2013.828293.  
Denzin, N.K., & Lincoln, Y .S. (Eds.) (2005). Handbook of Qualitative Research  (3rd ed). London: 
Sage.  
Fereday , J. & Muir-Cochrane, E. (2006). Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis: a hybrid 
approach of inductive and deductive coding and theme development. International Journal of Qualitative Methods , 5, 1-11. 
Fisher, J.D., Fisher, W.A., Williams, S.S. & Malloy, T.E. (1994). Empirical tests of an information -
motivation -behavioral skills model of AIDS -preventive behavior with gay men and heterosexual 
university students. Health Psychology, 13, 238–250. doi: 10.1037/0278- 6133.13.3.238  
França, L.R., Dautzenberg,  B. & Reynaud, M. (2010).  Heavy episodic drinking and alcohol 
consumption in French colleges: the role of perceived social norms. Alcohol: Clinical & Experimental Research, 34,  164-174.  
Fry, M.L. (2010). "Seeking the pleasure zone”: Understanding young adult ’s intoxication culture. 
Australasian Marketing Journal , 19, 65-70. doi:10.1016/j.ausmj.2010.11.009   
Gilligan, C. & Kypri, K. (2012)  Parent attitudes, family dynamics and adolescent drinking: 
qualitative study of the Australian parenting guidelines for adolescent alcohol use. BMC Public Health  2012 12:491. doi:10.1186/1471- 2458- 12-491 
Gordon, R., McDermott, L., Stead, M. & Angus, K. (2006). The effectiveness of social marketing 
interv entions for health improvement: What's the evidence? Public Health, 120, 1133-1139.  
doi:10.1016/j.puhe.2006.10.008  
Greene, J.C., & Caracelli, V .J. (1997). Defining and describing the paradigm issue in mixed -
method evaluation. New Directions for Evaluation, 74, 5-17. doi:10.1002/ev.1068  
Griffin, C., Bengry -Howell, A., Hackley, C., Mistral, W., & Szmigin, I. (2009). 'Every time I do it I 
absolutely annihilate myself': Loss of (self -)consciousness and loss of memory in young people's 
drinking narratives. Sociology , 43, 457 -476. doi:10.1177/0038038509103201   
Harrison, L., Kelly, P., Lindsay, J., Advocat, J., & Hickey, C. (2011). “ I don't know anyone that has 
two drinks a day ”: Young people, alcohol and the government of pleasure. Health, Risk & Society , 13, 
469-486. doi:10.1080/13698575.2011.596190  
Hendershot, C.S., Witkiewitz, K., George, W.H. & Marlatt, G.A. (2011). Relapse prevention for 
21 
 addictive behaviors. Substance Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy , 6: 17. doi:10.1186/1747-
597X -6-17 
Herring, R., Berridge, V . & Thom, B. (2008). Binge drinking: An exploration of a confused 
concept. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health, 62, 476 -479. 
doi:10.1136/jech.2006.056721  
Hoek, J. & Jones, S. (2011). Regulation, public health and social marketing: a behaviour change 
trinity. Journal of Social Marketing, 1 , 32-44. doi: 10.1108/20426761111104419 
Hutton, F. (2012). Harm reduction, students and pleasure: An examination of student responses to 
a binge drinking campaign. International Journal of Drug Policy , 23, 229 -235. 
doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2011.10.001  
Jayne, M., Valentine, G. & Holloway, S.L. (2010) Emotional, embodied and affective geographies 
of alcohol, drinking and drunkenness. Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers , 35, 540-
554. doi:10.1111/j.1475- 5661.2010.00401.x  
Kelly, J. A., St Lawrence, J. S., Stevenson, L. Y ., Hauth, A. C., Kalichman, S. C., Diaz, Y . E., 
Brasfield, T. L., Koob, J. J., & Morgan, M. G. (1992). Community AIDS/HIV risk reduction: the 
effects of endorsements by popular people in three cities. American Journal of Publ ic Health, 82, 
1483- 1489. 
Kitzinger, J. (1994). The methodology of focus groups: the importance of interaction between 
research participants. Sociology of Health & Illness , 16, 103 -121.  
Larimer, M.E., Palmer, R.S., Marlatt, G.A. (1999) Relapse prevention. An overview of Marlatt's 
cognitive -behavioral model. Alcohol Research & Health, 23, 151 -160.  
Lenton, S. & Midford, R: (1996) Clarifying ‘harm reduction ’? Drug & Alcohol Review, 15, 411-
413. 
Lewin, S., Glenton, C., Oxman, A.D. (2009) Use of qualitative methods alongside randomised 
controlled trials of complex healthcare interventions: methodological study.  
British Medical Journal , 339, b3496. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.b3496  
Livingstone, A.G., Young, H. & Manstead, A.S.R. (2011). “ We drink, therefore we are ”: the role of 
group identification and norms in sustaining and challenging heavy drinking “culture ”. Group 
Processes & Intergroup Relations, 14, 637 -649. doi:10.1177/1368430210392399   
MacNeela, P., & Bredin, O. (2011). Keeping your balance: Freedom and regulation in female 
university students' drinking practices. Journal of Health Psycholo gy, 16, 284- 293. 
doi:10.1177/1359105310372977  
MacPherson, I. & McKie, L. (2010). Qualitative Research in Programme Evaluation. In: I. 
Bourgeault, R. Dingwall, R. & R. de Vries (eds) Sage Handbook on Qualitative Methods in Health 
Research . London: Sage.  
Midford, R., Cahill, H., Foxcroft, D., Lester, L., Venning, L., Ramsden, R. & Pose, M. (2012) 
Drug education in Victorian schools (DEVS): the study protocol for a harm reduction focused school 
drug education trial. BMC Public Health , 12:112. [doi: doi:10.1 186/1471- 2458-12 -112] 
NHS Change 4 Life (2013). Choose Less Booze: Easy Drink Swaps. Retrieved 10 May 2013 from 
http://www.nhs.uk/change4life/pages/alcohol -drink -swaps.aspx   
Oakley, A., Strange, V ., Bonell, C., Allen, E., Stephenson, J. & RIPPLE Study Team. (2006). 
Process evaluation in randomised controlled trials of complex interventions . British Medical Journal , 
332, 413- 416.  
Office for National Statistics (2012). General Lifestyle Survey, 2011 . Newport: Office for National 
Statistics.  
Office for National Statistics (2013). Table A06: Educational status and labour market status for 
people aged from 16 to 24. Newport: Office for National Statistics, 2013. Available at: www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/lms/labour -market -statistics/december-2013/table -a06.xls
 
Randolph, W. & Viswanath, K. (2004). Lessons learned from public health mas s media 
22 
 campaigns: marketing health in a crowded media world. Annual Review of Public Health, 25, 419-
437. DOI: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.25.101802.123046  
Regan, D. & Morrison, T. (2013). Adolescents’ negative attitudes towards non -drinkers: a novel 
predi ctor of risky drinking. Journal of Health Psychology, 18, 1465- 1477.  doi: 
10.1177/1359105312464676 
Rutter, M. (1990). Psychosocial resilience and protective mechanisms. In J. Rolf, A.S. Masten, D. 
Cicchetti, K.H. Neuchterlein  & S. Weintraub (eds.) Risk and Protective Factors in the Development of 
Psychopathology  (pp.181- 212). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  
Sargeant, J. (2012). Qualitative research part II: Participants, analysis, and quality assurance. 
Journal of Graduate Medical Education, 4, 1-3. 
Shaw, R. (2010) . Embedding reflexivity within experiential qualitative p sychology. Qualitative 
Research in Psychology, 7 , 233 -243.  doi: 10.1080/14780880802699092  
Smith, J.A., Flowers, P. & Larkin , M. (2009). Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis: Theory 
Method and Research. London: Sage.  
Starkey, F., Audrey, S., Holliday, J., Moore, L. & Campbell, R. (2009) Identifying influential 
young people to undertake effective peer -led health promotion: the example of A Stop Smoking In 
Schools Trial (ASSIST) Health Education Research,  24, 977-988.  
Stephenson, J.M., Strange, V ., Forrest, S., Oakley, A., Copas, A., ... and the RIPPLE study team 
(2004). Pupil -led sex education in England (RIPPLE study). Lancet , 364, 338- 346. 
Szmigin, I., Bengry -Howell, A., Griffin, C., Hackley, C., & Mistral, W. (2011). Social marketing, 
individual responsibility and the "culture of intoxication". European Journal of Marketing, 45, 759 -
779. doi:10.1108/03090561111120028  
Szmigin, I., Griffin, C., Mistral, W., Bengry -Howell, A., Weale, L., & Hackley, C. (2008). Re -
framing 'binge drinking' as calculated hedonism: Empirical evidence from the UK. International 
Journal of Drug, 19 , 359 -366.  doi:10.1016/j.drugpo.2007.08.009  
Tashakkori, A., & Teddlie, C.B. (2003). Handbook of Mixed Methods in Social and Behavioural 
Research . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Thurnell -Read , T. (2011) . Off the leash and out of control: masculinities and embodiment in 
Eastern European stag tourism. Sociol ogy, 45, 977- 991. doi:10.1177/0038038511416149  
Tuong, W., Larsen, E.R. & Armstrong, A.W. (2014). Videos to influence: a systematic review of 
effectiveness of video -based education in modifying health behaviors. Journal of Behavioral 
Medicine, 37, 218-233.  doi: 10.1007/s10865-012 -9480 -7   
White, A., de Sousa, B., de Visser, R., Hogston, R., Madsen, S.A, ... , Zatonski, W. (2011). The 
State of Men ’s Health in Europe . Brussels: European Commission.  
Yardley, L . (2000) . Dilemmas in qualitative health research. Psychology & Health, 15 , 215 -228. 
doi: 10.1080/08870440008400302  
23 
 Figure 1 Outline of phases of evidence-based intervention development work  
 
Phase 1   
Phase 2   
Phase 3   
Phase 4   future work  
 
survey of  
1412 young people 
aged 16-21  
 
  
  
experiential interviews  
with 25 phase 1 
participants    
video development 
with young people   
video evaluation  
with teachers and pupils 
in 5 schools    
 
  
 
Aims:   
• assess importance of 
alcohol management 
skills   Aim:  
• identify effective 
alcohol management 
strategies   Aim:  
• illustrate strategies 
and tactics identified in 
Phase 2   Aims:   
• determine 
acceptability of 
intervention   
video revision   
based on  
phase 4 data  
• identify foci for 
planned interventions       • generate suggestions 
for improvements    
 
 
Analytic method:  
• Multivariate 
regression analysis   Analytic method:  
•  Interpretative 
Phenomenological 
Analysis   Strategic method:  
• Applying Phase 2 
findings to video 
content and structure   Analytic method:  
• Thematic analysis  
  feasibility trial  
in schools to assess 
efficacy of video-
based intervention  
Impact for project:  
 Identified general 
focus of Phase 3   Impact for project:  
• Refined focus of 
Phase 3   Impact for project:  
• Creation of evidence-
based intervention   Impact for project:  
• Evaluation of 
structure and style     
 
 
 Informed focus of 
Phase 2 interviews  
 Allowed purposive 
sampling for Phase 2   • Provided 
structure and content of 
Phase 3    • Evaluation of modes 
of delivery  
• Identification of areas 
for improvement   implementation  
of intervention 
in schools  
 
  
24 
  Theme description  Example quote  Characteristic strategies  Example tactics  
 
         
 enjoying the people 
one is with, and 
having a  good time 
in drinking 
situations  “There's no need to get yourself into 
that state. It's not enjoyable. You're gonna get taken home, miss out ”  
(F 16 -17, moderate drinker) • Have a range of 
engaging friends and interests  
• focus on other parts of 
a social event like  music, dancing, and talking to friends  • Choose social 
activities that don't involve alcohol (e.g., meet friends 
in a cafe) 
 
feeling authentically 
connected to, and accepted by, one's 
social network  “It's not like our friendship was 
based on alcohol. We were friends 
before we started drinking”  
(M 18+, former drinker)  • Trust that your friends 
will generally accept and support your decisions  
• take care of each other 
when drinking  • Choose 
unobtrusive non-alcoholic drinks (e.g., soft drinks) at 
social events
 
feeling like oneself 
and behaving in 
ways that reflect one’s identity and 
values  “My friends say they wouldn't want to 
meet the drunk version of them -
selves. I don't like the idea of there being a part of me that I wouldn't 
want to know fully  
(F 18+, non-drinker)  • Share your 
experiences and thoughts with a 
trusted friend  
• Reflect on whether the 
decisions you make when 
drinking are those you would 
make when sober  • Ask yourself 
“would I want to meet the 
drunk version of myself ” 
feeling that the 
decisions one 
makes about 
drinking, an d when 
drinking, are truly one's own  “[We] literally have no idea what 
happened ... went out with the same 
intention to stay sober, and the 
opposite happened”  
(F 16 -17, moderate drinker) • Think about hidden 
rules and expectations about 
drinking in your social group  
• Feel proud of the 
choices you make  • Stay sober and 
see what difference it makes  
• Observe your 
friends' behavior when they 
are drinking  
maintaining feelings 
of physical well -
being before, 
during, and after 
drinking  “The drinks are usually these  kind of 
big, massive pints which re usually horrible … I like to have a beer that 
tastes nice”  
(M 18+, moderate drinker) • Drink only what tastes 
good, but drink less of it  
• Slow down or stop 
drinking when you feel good  
• Check in on day -to-day 
fitness and mo od • Choose drinks 
you actually enjoy the taste of, but drink fewer of them
 
a fundamental 
sense of control of oneself and the 
environment 
(including managed 
loss of control)  “If I get drunk [other people may] 
make me do something silly and 
embarrass me … so I'm not going to 
drink ”  
(M 16 -17, moderate drinker) • Plan ahead, especially 
first drinking experiences  
• Plan ahead to avoid 
uncontrollable or frightening 
situations  • Have an “exit 
strategy ” to let you get 
home safely  
 

