Running head: PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  
Open Trial of the Parent Behavior Change Intervention (PBC -I): Study Protocol  
 
Lu Dong ,1,3 Eve R. Fine,1 Susan Michie ,2 Qing Zhou ,1 Alice Mullin ,1 Cynthia G. Alvarado -
Martinez ,1 Heather E. Hilmoe ,1 Melanie Tran ,1 Allison G. Harvey1 
1University of California, Berkeley  
2University College London  
3RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA  
 
Author Note  
Lu Dong, Eve Fine, Qing Zhou, Alice Mullin, Cynthia Alvarado -Martinez, Heather 
Hilmoe, Melanie Tran, and Allison Harvey, Department of Psychology, University of California, 
Berkeley; Susan Michie, Centre for Behaviour Change, University College London ; Lu Dong  is 
now at  RAND Corporation. This research is supported by the National Institute s of Health (NIH) 
Science of Behavior Change Common Fund Program through an award administered by the 
Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human Dev elopment (NICHD) 
(R21HD097819 ). Clinical Trial registratio n: NCT03926221 . The authors declared no conflicts of 
interest. We are grateful to all parent -adolescent dyads who participated in this study. We are 
also grateful for our clinical therapists (Jennifer Cust, Tacie Moskowitz, Marisa Schweber -
Koren, Cristina Gomez -Vidal, Megan Shea, Ashley Esquivel, Elizabeth Clendenen, Olivia 
Calkins, Brenna Alexander, Casey Rodriguez, Anna Leversee, Reem Aranki, Sam Blickle, 
Shaniqua Cartwright, and Lia Tamminnen) and supervisors (Michael Dolsen, Caitlin Gasperetti, 
and Nicole Gumport).  Correspondence concerning this article should be a ddressed to  Allison G. 
Harvey, University of California, Berkeley, Department of Psychology, 2121 Berkeley Way, 
Berkeley, CA 94720 -1650. E -mail: aharvey@berkeley.edu .  
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  2 
Abstract  
Objective : Parents have profound  impacts  on adolescents ’ health behavior s. Yet parents receive 
minimal training in the elements of conversations that optimally inspire their children toward 
engaging in healthy behaviors.  The current study  examines a novel interpersonal target : parent -
adolescent  conversations about adolescent health behavior change. Derived from a dvances in  the 
science of behavior change , the Parent Behavior Change Intervention (PBC -I) contains  
conversational elements  (e.g., behavior change techniques, positive communication strategies) 
hypothesized to reduce parent -adolescent  coercion and conflict and facilitate upward spirals of 
healthy behavior change  in adolescents . Methods/ Design:  The first phase  of the study  involves 
the development of  the PBC -I in a small case series ( N = 12 dyads) . The second phase involves 
an open tria l of the PBC -I (N = 36 dyads) . Adolescents will receive six, 50 -min sessions of the 
Transdiagnostic Sleep and Circadian Intervention (TranS -C) to improve sleep while their parents 
receive six, 50 -min session s of the PBC -I. Parent -adolescent dyad s wil l be assessed before and 
after the intervention. The primary analysis will examine whether  postintervention use of 
behavior change techniques and positive communication strategies by parents is higher than 
preintervention use and whether increased use by pa rents predicts more positive conversational 
behavior s, less parent -adolescent  conflict, higher  adolescent motivation  for change , and 
improved  adolescent sleep . Discussion:  This research provides an initial test of the hypothesis 
that improving  the parent -adolescent conversation  will improve adolescent sleep health behavior . 
While sleep -related health behaviors are the focus of this study , the research is designed to be 
relevant to a broad range of health behavior change  in young people . 
Keywords : adolescen ce, sleep , parent intervention , behavior change techniques   
TRIAL REGISTRATION : NCT03926221 . Registered on April 24, 2019.  
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  3 
Open Trial of the Parent Behavior Change Intervention (PBC -I): Study Protocol  
Adolescence  is a period of considerable  risk and vulnerability  (Steinberg et al., 2015) . It 
is also when future patterns, habits, and tendencies are established . Hence, an urgent need exists 
to identify novel modifiable contributors to risk and vulnerability among adolescent s. The goal 
of this article  is to describe the rationale and the treatment development process for a new 
program of research that  aims to investigate two promising interven tion targets  to reduce health  
risks and increase sustainable health behaviors in youth : parent -adolescent  conversation s and 
sleep health . 
Rationale for Focusing on Parent -Adolescent  Conversation   
Parent -adolescent  conversation  is an important contributor to the health choices of 
adolescents , including alcohol use  (Reimuller, Hussong, & Ennett, 2011) , smoking  
experimentation  (White, 2012) , risk-taking behavior  (Wilson & Donenberg, 2004) , and sexual 
health behavior  (Widman, Choukas -Bradley, Noar, Nesi, & Garrett, 2016) . High levels of 
coercion and conflict within parent -adolescent  dyads are associated  with negative adolescent 
outcomes , from greater internalizing behaviors such as avoidance  (e.g., Saxbe, Ramos, 
Timmons, Rodriguez, & Margolin, 2014)  and externalizing behaviors  such as aggression  (e.g., 
Ehrlich, Dykas, & Cassidy, 2012; Klahr, Rueter, McGue, Iacono, & Alexandra Burt, 2011)  to 
declines in  academic achievement  (Dotterer, Hoffman, Crouter, & McHale, 2008) , whereas 
moderate levels of conflict are associated with more positive outcomes  (Smetana, Campione -
Barr, & Metzger, 2006) . On the other hand, more positive parent -adolescent communication and 
parental warmth were associated with a broad range of health domains, including less substance 
use and risky behaviors (Piko & Balázs, 2012) , better eating habits and less weight problems 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  4 
(Pearson, Atkin, Biddle, Gorely, & Edwardson, 2010) , and  better  sleep (Brand, Hatzinger, Beck, 
& Holsboer -Trachsler, 2009) .  
Despite this evidence, parents receive minimal training in the specific elements of 
conversations that optimally inspire their children to engage in healthy behaviors. Progress has 
been  made in terms of health professionals using parent s as change agent s to promote adolescent 
sexual health and prevent  unintended pregnancies (Gavin, Williams, Rivera, & Lachance, 2015; 
Jaccard & Dittus, 1 991; Jaccard & Levitz, 2015) . However, relative to preventing problem 
behaviors, little research  is available on increasing health behaviors in adolescents , such as sleep -
promoting behaviors , through parent -based interventions.  Hence, the current study examines  a 
novel interpersonal target , namely, to pinpoint the micro -mechanisms of parent -adolescent  
conversations about behavior change that may improve parent -adolescent  conversations, lessen 
coercion and conflict , as a first step toward harnessing the role parents could play in promoting 
sustainable health behaviors in their adolescents .  
Rationale for Focusing on Sleep as the Target Health Behavior  
 On average, a dolescents sleep 7 hours each night during the schoo l year  (Asarnow, 
McGl inchey, & Harvey, 2014) , falling 2.25 hours short of the recommended 9.25 hours  
(Carskadon et al., 1980; Matricciani, Blunden, Rigney, Williams, & Olds, 2013) . One major 
contributor to this sleep deprivation  is the “eveningness ” circadian preference , which affect s 
approximately 40% of adolescents  (Carskadon, Acebo, Richardson, Tate, & Seifer, 1997; 
Roenneberg et al., 2004) .  Eveningness  refers to a delayed sleep -wake schedule ; combined with 
early school start time s, it leads to sleep deprivation  and sleep variability from weekdays to 
weekends  (Crowley, Acebo, & Carskadon, 2007; Gradisar et al., 2013) . This is of concern 
because a dequate sleep is critical for optimal brain development  (Tarokh, Saletin, & Carskadon, 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  5 
2016) . Also, eveningness is con sistently associated with  problems in emotional  (Gau et al., 
2007) , cognitive  (Goldstein, Hahn, Hasher, Wiprzycka, & Zelazo, 2007; Short, Gradisar, Lac k, 
& Wright, 2013) , behavioral  (e.g., Adan, Natale, Caci, & Prat, 2010; Negriff, Dorn, Pabst, & 
Susman, 2011) , social, and physical health domains  (Miller, Lumeng, & LeBourgeois, 2015; 
Schaal, Peter, & Randler, 2010) .  
While the biological shift toward eveningness may be difficult to modify, a novel 
behavioral sleep intervention —the Transdiagnostic Intervention for Sleep and Circadian 
Rhythms (TranS -C)—has been designed to modify psychosocial, behavioral , and cognitive 
contributors  to eveningness , such as technology use around nighttime  and irregular bed times  and 
waketimes from weekdays to weekends (Harvey, 2016; Harvey & Buysse, 2017; Harvey et al., 
2018) . Consistent with research documenting the effectiveness of sleep interventions for youth, a  
recent randomized controlled trial showed that TranS -C, rela tive to psychoeducation , effectively 
reduced eveningness and impro ved sleep in adolescents  (Dong, Gumport, Martinez, & Harvey, 
2019; Harvey et al., 2018) . During the initial phase of the TranS -C implementation, parents were 
invited to join the final 5 -10 minutes of each 50 -minute session to promote acceptance and 
reinforceme nt of change. It became apparent that these parent -adolescent  conversations could 
become strikingly negative, coercive , and conflictual , which motivated the current research . One 
goal of the current research is to develop a parent intervention to supplemen t TranS -C in which 
parents are taught to use effective behavior change techniques (BCTs) and positive 
communication strategies with their  adolescents  to promote better sleep .  
Theoretical Background  
Little is known about  how parents shape their adolescents’ sleep health behaviors  through 
daily conversations . As adolescents take greater control of their own sleep , relative to younger 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  6 
children, parent -adolescent conversations  about sleep may be an important sleep -related 
socialization target used by parents. As shown in Figure 1 and based on prior work (Brand, 
Gerbe r, Hatzinger, Beck, & Holsboer -Trachsler, 2009; Brand, Hatzinger, et al., 2009; Erath & 
Tu, 2011) , the Parent Behavior Change Intervention ( PBC -I) is predicted to increase parental use 
of BCTs and positive conversation al behavior  and thereby improve par ent-adolescent  
conversation s about sleep, reduce coercion and conflict in parent -adolescent  conversation s, and 
promote an authoritative parenting style . Improved parent -adolescent  communication  is 
theoretically predicted to increase adolescents’ motivation  for making health behavior changes. 
Moreover, by teaching parents how to deliver BCTs  and positive communication strategies , the 
intervention is expected to promote more positive parent -adolescent conversation  about behavior 
change  (e.g., using BCTs such as problem solving to identify and overcome barriers to change , 
instead of nagging or yelling)  that, in turn, is hypothesized to contribute to adolescents’ 
sustainable healthy sleep behaviors by supporting emotion  regulation and self -regulation  (El-
Sheikh et al., 2009; Erath & Tu, 2011; Hessler & Katz, 2010; Lohaus, Vierhaus, & Ball, 2009) . 
Several important factors are recognized in this model : (a) the predicted effect  of factors such as 
family economic stressors as well as parent stress and psychopathology  on uptake of the 
intervention (El-Sheikh et al., 2013; El -Sheikh, Kelly, Bagley, & Wetter, 2012) ; (b) the potential 
for reciprocal effects of teen sleep -related health behaviors on parent -adolescent  conversation , 
coercion and conflict , and parenting style  (Kerr, Stattin, & Özdemir, 2012) ; and (c) the 
detrimental effect of poor sleep on adolescent ’s motivation for behavior ch ange  (Beebe, 2011; 
Wolfson & Carskadon, 2003) .  
The treatment development process  is based on the theoretic al framework of the behavior 
change wheel. The behavioral model at the heart of the behavior change wheel incorporates the 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  7 
key processes of the following  theories and practices : theory of planned behavior, self -regulation 
theory, operant learning theory, r elapse prevention theory, health belie f model, motivational 
interviewing, and motivational enhancement  (Michie, Atkins, & West, 2014; Michie, van 
Stralen, & West, 2011) . An integral part  of the process  of applyi ng the behavior c hange wheel to 
intervention development is to select  the “active ingredients ,” i.e., the BCT s likely to be effective 
given the understanding of the target behaviors. The extensive 93 -item BCT taxonomy  is useful 
for this purpose  (Michie et al., 2013, 2015) . In the current study, the behavior change wheel 
framework is used to conceptualize and develop the intervention for parent -level behavior 
change , with the aim of increasing the  use of effective  BCTs , positive conversation al behaviors , 
and adolescent  sleep -promoting behaviors  (e.g., adhering to a bedtime routine, regularizing 
bedtime and wake up time  from weekdays to wee kend ). Intervention strategies are selected from 
the BCT taxonomy  for both parent -level and adolescent -level behavior change  (Figure 1 shows 
examples of BCTs parents are taught to use to promote adolescent  behavior change) . This 
method has  been used  to dev elop interventions related to  a wide range of  health behavior change, 
such as smoking cessation, healthy diet, physical activities , weight management, and self -
management of chronic illness  (e.g., Brooksbank et al., 2019; Michie, Abraham, Whittington, 
McAteer, & Gupta, 2009; Michie, Churchill, & West, 2011; Walsh et al., 2019) . While a few 
prior studies have derived parent interventions to promote sexual behavior  (Schuster et al., 2008)  
and sedentary behaviors  (St. George, Wilson, Schneider, & Alia, 2013) , to the best of our 
knowledge there is no prior parent intervention to promote adolescent sleep health and no prior 
parent intervention was derived using the behavior change wheel framework with BCTs 
intentionally specified.  
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  8 
Importantly , this research is designed following the experimental therapeutic approach, 
which is a framework advocated by the National Institute of Mental Health and other federal 
agencies for psychosocial intervention research that requires not only quantifying treatment 
efficacy but also explaining the mechanism of cha nge (Insel, 2015) . As shown i n Figure 2, 
following the experimental medicine approach, t he PBC -I focuses  on a novel intervention target : 
parent -adolescent  communication . The target engagement will be verified by use of several 
measures and coding procedures.  
Aims and Hypotheses  
The current article describe s the rationale and process involved in  developing a parent 
intervention to promote better sleep behavior change  in adolescents . The first aim is to develop 
and refine a novel intervention —the PBC -I—to improve parent use of BCTs and positive 
communication in a case series of 12 parent -adolescent  dyads . The PBC -I will be delivered to 
parents while their teen is receiving TranS -C. The second aim is t o conduct a small open  trial (N 
= 36 dyads) to test the  PBC -I. There are two hypotheses. First, relative to before the intervention, 
postintervention parent -adolescent  conversations will be characterized by more parent use of 
BCTs, less negative and more positive parent conversational behavior s, less parent -adolescent  
coercion and conflict, more teen motivation, more youth engagement in sleep -promoting 
behavior, and improved sleep. Second, increased parent use of BCTs from before to after the 
PBC -I will be associated with less negative and more positive parent conversa tional behavior s, 
less parent -adolescent  coercion and conflict, more teen motivation, more youth engagement in 
sleep -promoting behavior, and improved sleep . The third aim is to conduct exploratory analys es 
on whether  the primary outcomes for parent conversational behavior , parent -adolescent  coercion 
and conflict , and teen motivation for behavior change mediate the relationship between BCT 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  9 
frequency and the primary sleep outcomes. Whether  parent use of BCTs is moderated by age, 
gender, and race/ ethnic ity of the adolescent and gender of the parent will also be investigated . 
Proposed Methods  
Study Design and Setting  
The current study  is being conducted in a U.S. university psycholog ical clinic. The study 
has two phases. The first phase is a pilot phase in which a case series ( N = 12) is conducted  to 
develop and refine the PBC -I treatment. The second phase of the study is an open trial with a 
one-group pre -test/post-test design to test the PBC -I in 36 parent -adolescent  dyads, in which the 
parent will rece ive PBC -I and the teen will receive TranS -C in parallel sessions. We considered 
but decided against adding a control group  because (a) we already know the effect size of the 
TranS -C interventi on from a prior  NICHD -funded R01 randomized controlled trial (N = 176) 
and (b) we will learn more about the new parent intervention in 36 dyads  (N in an open trial)  
than in 18 dyads  (N of the experimental group in a 1:1 randomized controlled trial)  because it 
will provide greater variation as well as a larger dataset .  
Open Science  Plans  
Consistent with open science, p reregistration of the study  design , eligibility criter ia, and 
outcome measures  are available at Clinical Trials.gov (NCT03926221 ) since this study meets 
National Institute of Health’s  definition of  a clinical trial . An Open Science Framework page has 
been created for this study  (https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/NPM5G ) and data used for the 
analysis (i.e., preregistered variables)  will be uploaded , including raw and derived 7 -day sleep 
diary and actigraphy variables, questionnaire measures, BCT coding data, conversation behavior 
coding data, and coding reliability data. Recordings and transcr ipts of the parent -adolescent 
conversations will not be shared to protect participants’ privacy. A GitHub page will be created 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  10 
to share codes used for statistical analysis (including version control). Preprint will be posted on 
psyarxiv.com and the manuscr ipt will be open access when published.   
Participants and Procedures  
A total of 48 parent -adolescent  dyads  (12 dyads for the pilot phase and 36  dyads  for the 
open trial) are being recruited through multiple methods, including  in schools, in the community , 
and through online e-mail discussion and interest groups  in the U.S. San Francisco Bay Area. 
Interested parents and adolescents  are first screen ed separately by phone  to determine the 
adolescent’s  eligibility according to  the inclusion and exclusion criter ia.  
The inclusion criteria for the adolescents are as follows: (a) age between 10 and 18 years 
(age 10 was based on the start age of adolescence defined by the WHO; Sawyer, Azzopardi, 
Wickremarathne, & Patton, 2018)  and residence with a parent or guardian; (b) lowest quartile of 
the Children’s Morningness -Eveningness Preferences (CMEP) scale (score ≤27); (c) self -
reported weekday sleep onset time for the past month later than 10:40 pm for 10 –13-year-olds, 
11:00 pm f or 14 –16-year-olds, and 11:20 for 17 –18-year-olds at least three nights per week and 
total sleep time ≤8 hours for at least three nights per week; (d) English language fluency; (e) able 
and willing to give informed assent; and (f) participation in all stud y sessions by at least one 
parent or primary caregiver living in the same household as the adolescent at least 50% of the 
week.   
The exclusion criteria for the adolescents are as follows: (a) an active, progressive 
physical illness directly related to the onset and course of the sleep disturbance; (b) evidence of 
sleep apnea, restless legs, or periodic limb movements; (c) significantly impairing pervasive 
developmental disorder per parent report; (d) history of substance dependence in the past 6 
months; (e)  suicide risk per youth report; (f) bipolar disorder or schizophrenia or another current 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  11 
Axis I disorder if there is a significant risk of harm and/or decompensation if treatment of that 
comorbid condition is delayed as a function of participating in any s tage of this study; or (g) new 
(unestablished) medication use (≤4 weeks). Eligible parent -adolescent  dyads are then invited for 
an in -person pretreatment  assessment . During the pretreatment  assessment, eligibility is  further  
confirmed by assessing the prese nce of suicide risk using the Columbia -Suicide Severity Rating 
Scale  (C-SSRS)  (Shahid, Wilkinson, Marcu, & Shapiro, 2011) , certain sleep disorders  (included 
in the exclusion criteria)  using relevant se ctions of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep 
Disorders  (Edinger et al., 2009) , and substance use  using relevant modules  on alcohol  and 
substance use  from the Schedule for Affec tive Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age 
Children ( K-SADS ) (Kaufman et al., 1997) . A flowchart of the study design is presented in 
supplemen tal material A . Pretreatment  and posttreatment assessment s include questionnaire 
measures, behavioral tasks, and 7 -day sleep diary and actigraphy  collection . Recommend ations 
for Interventional Trials (SPRIT 2013) Checklist  and Figure are provided in supple mental 
material  B and C.  
Measures  
 The primary and secondary outcomes are presented in Table 1 and the measures are 
described below .  
 Hot Topic s Task  (Eisenberg et al., 2008; Hetherington, 2008) . This task is administered 
before and after treatment . The task integrates two assays  from the Science of Behavior Change 
(SOBC) research network : Couples Conflict Task and Rapid Marital Interaction Coding System. 
In prior research, intraclass correlations based on codin g of this task have ranged from .71  to .93 
(Eisenberg et al., 2008) . The paren t and adolescent each rate 44 topic s of frequent disagr eement 
and the intensity of anger for each topic  by using the Issue Checklist (Prinz,  Foster, Kent, & 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  12 
O’Leary, 1979) . Based on the responses, the two topics with the highest anger intensity are 
chosen. T he parent -adolescent  dyad are then left alone to have two 8 -minute conversations about 
these two topics. The researchers specif y that o ne of the topics is about sleep (either “bedtime” 
or “getting up in the morning”  from the Issue Checklist, whichever has the highest anger 
intensity rating ); the other is a topic rated as most conflict -generating. If the anger intensity is the 
same for par ent and  adolescent but for different topics, the topic will be chosen  at random. The 
conversations are  videotaped  and later transcribed verbatim . The videotapes and transcriptions 
are used by two coding teams to code for the parent ’s use of BCTs  as well as the parent’s 
positive and negative conversational behavior s, respectively . The sleep -related conversation 
ensures the conversations are comparable  across dyads  in terms of the BCTs and positive  and 
negative conversational behavior s; the non-sleep-related conversation allows for an index of the 
broader (beyond sleep) impacts of parental use of BCTs and conversational behavior s.  
 End-of-Session  Conversation.  After the 45-minute  session with the therapist, the parent 
will be invited to join  their adolescent . The  adolescent coach  will read the dyad an instruction 
about this task and l eave the room to allow the dyad to have a 5 -min conversation. The 
instruction for the dyad specifies that the conversation is to “discuss the teen’s sleep goals for 
this week and how the teen will achieve these goals” and encourages the dyad to stay on topic.  
The purpose of this task is for the adolescent to tell their parent the collaboratively devised plan 
for improving the teen’s sleep for the week ahead  and fo r the parent to apply the BCTs along 
with positive communication strategies to support the teen’s sleep goal (s). The Conversations 
will be audiotaped  and transcribed verbatim, and the tapes will be coded for parent use of BCTs 
and positive  and negative conversational behavior s. In addition, a bout 2  to 3 times during the 
course of the treatment, the PBC -I therapist will review the End-of-Session  Conversation from 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  13 
the previous session and provide the parent constructive feedback in the next session  on their use 
of BCTs and communication strategies .   
 Coercion and conflict. Two measures are used to assess parent -adolescent  coercion and 
conflict. The Issues Checklist  (IC) assesses 44 topics on which parents and adolescents  may have 
disagreements  (Prinz et al., 1979) . The measure is given to both parent and adolescents . The 
frequency and intensity of each topic are rated. The outcome  variabl es derived from the I C are 
the mean anger intensity and the number of conﬂicts. Reliability is well established . In addition, 
parent and adolescent  version s of the Conflict Behavior Questionnaire  are administered to the 
parent -adolescent  dyad  (Prinz et al., 1979) . The study  will use the 20 -item version  (Robin & 
Foster, 1989) . The questionnaire contains 20 true -false scale items and assesses  perceived 
communication  conflict  between parent -adolescent  dyads . It has adequate reliability  (Cronback’s 
alpha = 0.88 -0.95) and validity  data (Prinz et al., 1979; Robin & Foster, 1989) .  
Teen motivation for behavior change.  Two measures are used to assess  adolescent  
motiv ation for behavior change. The Decisional Balance Worksheet  is a measure of motivation 
to change  (Collins, C arey, & Otto, 2009; Collins, Eck, Torchalla, Schröter, & Batra, 2010) . It has 
adequate predictive, convergent, and discriminant validity. The targeted behavior is “improving 
sleep .” The c ounts of pros and cons of change are obtained and converted  into the decision al 
balance  proportion  [(pros change  + cons no-change )/(pros change  + cons change  + pros no-change  + cons no-change )] 
representing the decisional balance toward  change . DBP scores between 0 and 0.5 indicate a 
balance tipped towards maintenance of the  current behavior, a score of 0.5 indicates an even 
balance between changing versus maintaining behavior, and scores between 0.5 to 1 indicate a 
balance tipped towards behavior change.     
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  14 
The Intrinsic Motivation Inventory  assesses intrinsic motivation re lated to a target 
activity ( “participating in sleep coaching sessions ”) (McAuley, Duncan, & Tammen, 1989) . This 
measure is factor analytically coherent and stable across a variety of tasks, conditions, and 
settings  (Deci, Eghrari, Patrick, & Leone, 1994) , has good internal consistency (Cronbach’s 
alpha = 0.85) , and has demonstrated strong temporal stability  (McAuley et al., 1989) . Three 
subscales  are administered : interest/enjoyment (7 items), perceived competence (6 items) , and 
effort/importance (5 items).  
Sleep -promoting behavior and sleep . Sleep promoting behaviors refer to a set of sleep 
health recommendations covered in TranS -C, such as regularizing bedtime and wake up time, 
adhering to a bedtime routine (e.g., dim light, eliminate screen time before going to bed) and 
rise-up routin e that promotes optimal sleep. Sleep -promoting behaviors are measured  using a 7-
day sleep diary and actigraphy . A sleep diary is considered the gold standard (Carney et al., 
2012)  and more than 5 days of sleep diary data can yield reliable estimates of sleep in 
adolescents  (Short, Arora, Gradisar, Taheri, & Carskadon, 2017) . Actigraphy is obtained via the 
Actiwatch Spectrum activity monitor (Philips Respironics), which continuously measures  
movement  (sampled in 60 -s epochs) . Actigraphy is strongly correlated with polysomnography  
(Cole, Kripke, Gruen, Mullaney, & Gillin, 1992)  and has been validated in adolescents  (Johnson 
et al., 2007; Sadeh, Sharkey, & Carskadon, 1994) . Regularity in  sleep midpoint  will be derived 
from the sleep diary and actigraphy.   
Global sleep functioning is measured by using the Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index (PSQI) 
(Buysse et al., 1989) . The PSQI is a 19 -item questi onnaire that yields a global score ranging 
from 0 to 21 , with higher scores indicating greater sleep problems in the past month. The PSQI is 
widely used and  has been  validated in youth as a global measure of sleep.  The total score had 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  15 
good convergent and divergent validity and moderate reliability (Cronbach’s alpha = 0.72) in a 
sample of adolescents and young adults (de la Vega e t al., 2015) . Eveningness preference is 
measured using the CMEP  scale (Carskadon, Viei ra, & Acebo, 1993) , a self -report measure of 
the degree of eveningness. Scores range from 10 ( extreme evening preference) to 43 ( extreme 
morning preference) . Prior studies reported that t he CMEP scores have good  reliability  
(Cronbach’s alpha = 0.78 -0.82) (Carskadon, Seifer, & Acebo, 1991; Díaz ‐Morales, de Leon, & 
Sorroche, 2007)  and good convergent  validity (Kim, Dueker, Hasher, & Goldstein, 2002) .  
Coding Procedures  
 Coding for BCT s. All coders completed the online training and obtai ned certificates for 
BCT coding ( www.bct -taxonomy.com ). Coding is conducted in pairs. Two coders independently 
code a Hot Topics Task or End-of-Session  Conversation by first reading the transcription line by 
line and listening to the video - and audiotapes twice and then marking the exact words signifying 
a BCT and assigning it a label from the existing taxonomy. Coders then meet to compare the 
codes and resolve discrepancies through discussion. We will report perc ent agreement, kappa, 
and prevalence -adjusted and bias -adjusted (PABAK) for inter -rater reliability.  
 Coding for positive and negative conversational behavior s. Parent’s positive and 
negative conversational behavior s used during the Hot Topics Task and End-of-Session  
Conversation will be coded by use of a codebook developed for this study. It was adapted from 
the Interaction Behavior Code (Prinz & Kent, 1978) , which  is designed to assess parent -
adolescent communication through  consensus coding from  several raters who review and code 
the audio - and videotapes and transcript s of the conversation s. In our coding manual ( see 
supplemental material D), codes 1 to 23  are rated “yes” (1 point) if the behaviors occurred at all 
during the conversation; otherwise , they are rated “no” (0 point).  A coding team separate from 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  16 
the BCT coding team will review and code the audio - or video -tapes and transcripts of the 
conversations. Coders are blind to the session number for the end -of-session conversation and 
assessment time point (pre or post -treatment) for the Hot Topic task.  Each tape or transcrip t is 
independently coded by  a group of three coders , and then resolve discrepancy through 
discussion.   
Treatment Development Process  
The PBC -I components were derived through three parallel phases  (for details see Dong, 
Fine, & Harvey, 2019) . Phase  1 involved identifying  BCTs to be delivered for parents to use 
with their adolescent children ( for adolescent sleep behavior change) and for therapists to use 
with parents (for parent  conversation  behavior change) . The treatment development team  (LD, 
EF, AGH) , who has expertise in TranS -C and psychological treatment development , met weekly 
for the first pilot phase of the study to conceptualize behavior change at the parent and 
adolescent  level  using the Behaviour Change Wheel framework (Michie et al., 2014; Michie, van 
Stralen, et al., 2011) . On the basis of this , each BCT  from the BCT taxonomy (Michie et al., 
2013)  was evaluated by the treatment development team for inclusion in the PBC -I. Team 
members first created scenarios of how each BCT could be applicable to the PBC -I, and 
independently rated each BCT as either high or low in terms of the priority for inclusion in the 
PBC -I. The team met to discuss and resolve discrepancies. As part of the rating process, the team 
also identified BCTs that would potentially contribute to conflict and coercion in parent -
adolescent conversation (e.g., punishment , remove reward ). This process resulted in a list of 
BCTs for parents to use with their adolescent children to promote sleep change and for therapists 
to use with parents to promote BCT use respectively (see supplemental material E).  This list 
serves as the basis of drafting the  PBC -I manual (see supplemental material F, also available at 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  17 
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/8U457 ). For example, the PBC -I prioritizes teaching parents 
BCTs related to goals and planning (e.g., proble m solving , reviewing behavior goals ), feedback 
and monitoring (e.g., feedback on behavior), social support, restructuring  the physical and social 
environment , rewards, and comparison of outcomes (e.g., pros and cons ). Therapists are 
encouraged to use  BCTs such as goals and planning (e.g., problem solving, action planning) 
repetition and substitution (e.g., behavioral practice/ experiment ), shaping knowledge (e.g.,  
behavioral experiment , instruction of how to perform behavior ), comparison of outcomes (e. g., 
pros and cons ) with parents to promote parent behavior change .  
 Phase 2 involved a review of literature to identify the communication skills that promote 
positive parent -child interaction and may support the optimal delivery of BCTs. . Phase 3 
involve d a review of evaluations of parent and family interventions to consider additional 
components used to address adolescent problem behaviors. The initial PBC -I contents were 
tested with a small number of pilot cases ( N = 12) in an iterative process. Treatme nt manuals for 
therapists and handouts for parents ( included as a supplemental material and also available at: 
https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/8U457 ) were developed on the basis of this work and modifie d 
after piloting as needed. PBC -I has two main components. The first component involves BCTs 
that therapists teach parents to use to promote adolescents ’ health behavior change  as well as 
BCTs that therapists use with parents to change their behavior (i.e., increase the use of effective  
BCTs in supporting their adolescent  to change health behavior) . The second component involves 
positive communication strategies  (e.g., focusing on strengths, use open ended questions, ta ke 
turns speaking)  for parents to  use when delivering  the BCTs .  
The PBC -I consists of six, 50 min sessions. Each session follows a general structure, 
including agenda setting, homework review, introducing and practicing skills (e.g., specific 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  18 
BCTs, positive communication strategies), eliciting feedback, setting homework, and end -of-
session conversation. Additionally, session 1 includes psychoeducation on the importance of 
parent involvement and monitoring; session 6 includes deriving a plan to mainta in intervention 
gains. The PBC -I encourages parent coaches to use role -play, behavioral experiments, and 
behavioral rehearsal techniques to practice using new BCTs combined with positive 
communication strategies to support the adolescent’s behavior change.  Homework is assigned 
weekly for parents to practice skills at home and track their progress.  
Data Analysis  
 The sample size was determined based on feasibility  considerations , including the limits 
of time  (2 years)  and resources. Data analysis will be com pleted in Stata 16.0. Data will be 
double entered if not directly entered by participants. Data will be audited for quality and 
completeness. Variable distributions will be evaluated to ensure that assumptions of planned 
analyses are met. For aim 1  (PBC -I development) , the results  of process evaluation (qualitative 
data) from the treatment development process will be reported . For aim 2  hypothesis 1  (whether 
there is pre -post change in outcomes  of interest ), the main effect of time will be investigated by 
evaluating pretreatment  to post -treatment change s on outcomes of interest , using repeated -
measures ANOVA . The outcome variables (each will be tested separately) will be the primary 
and secondary outcomes listed in Table 1. For aim 2 hypothesis 2  (whether pre-post change in 
BCT usage predicts pre-post change in other parent and adolescent outcomes) , linear regression 
will be used to examine whether pre-post changes in BCT usage predict pre -post changes in 
parent conversational behavior , parent -adolescent  coercion and conflict, more teen motivation, 
more youth engagement in sleep -promoting behavior, and improved sleep. We will also test for 
potential curvilinear relationship between BCT usage and parent conversational behavior and 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  19 
parent -adolescent coercion  and conflict. The independent variables will be the number of BCTs 
used and types of BCTs used by parent. The outcome variables (each will be tested separately) 
will be the number of negative and positive communication behaviors, parent and youth 
perceive d general conflict, youth decisional balance proportion, youth self -reported motivation, 
youth sleep midpoint via sleep -dairy and actigraphy, youth subjective sleep quality, and youth 
eveningness. For a im 3, exploratory analysis will be conducted to examin e the potential indirect 
effects of BCT usage  on improved sleep via improved parent -adolescent conversation . Data 
visualization and stratified analysis will be used to explore possible effect modification by age 
and gender of the adolescent and gender of t he parent.  
Discussion  
The current article describes the  rationale  and development  of a parent intervention that 
aims to promote better sleep by improving parent -adolescent conversations about adolescents’ 
health behavior change . The current article  also describes the protocol of an open trial  that tests 
the PBC -I. The premise of this program of research is that parents have a massive impact on their 
adolescents . Training parents in effective conversation strategies  may reduce parent -adolescent 
confl ict and f acilitate adolescents’ health behavior change . The results of the study will provide  
preliminary data on whether improved parent -adolescent conversation about health behavior 
change is a promising mechanism to improve adolescent motivation to change, increase the 
uptake of sleep -promoting behavior, and improve adolescent  sleep.   
This research program provide s an example of how the  experimental medicine approach 
and recent advances in the science of behavior change can be  applied in the development of an 
intervention , which is in turn tested empirically to  further our understanding of the behavioral 
change mec hanisms . Specifically, the PBC -I will be the first application of the behavior change 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  20 
wheel and the BCT taxonomy in parent -adolescent conversation s about adolescents’ sleep 
behavior change.  The current article  also illustrate s how the  implementation of the experimental 
medicine approach embraces open science by preregistration  and prespecification of the study 
protocol. While the current research focuses on parent use of BCTs to promote adolescent sleep 
changes, futures studies could ex plore whether these BCTs might be generalized for other 
adolescent health behaviors and how best to help parents transfer skills learned in PBC -I to 
promote other health behavior change in their adolescent children.  
One major limitation of the current study is that the initial version of the PBC -I will be 
tested in an open trial, without a control group. This decision was made to prioritize the 
treatment development process given  the exploratory nature of this study  and the limited time 
and resources . However, i f the results are encouraging, we will propose a randomized controlled 
trial to establish the efficacy of the intervention . In addition, the current study only assesses 
direct communication between parent and adolescent. It would be important for future research 
to also examine indirect communication to fully understand the parent -adolescent 
communication  about adolescent’s health behaviors . Future steps of this program of r esearch 
may include applying  the PBC -I contents to address other health behavior changes in 
adolescents. For example,  the active ingredients  of the PBC -I (e.g.,  behavior change techniques  
and conversation strategies) may be tested  to promote  a broad range of youth health behavior , 
such as  dental hygiene, diet,  and exercise . Given that this project is the first  (to our knowledge)  
to apply the Behavior Change Wheel framework to derive a parent intervention for adolescent 
behavior change, future  research should also determine which BCTs are most effective when 
used by parents to promote adolescent behavior change.  
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  21 
 Authors’ contributions  
AGH, LD, QZ, and SM  conceived of and designed the study and acquired the funding. 
AGH, LD, EF, AM, CAM, HH, and MT are responsible for the acquisition of data. LD, EF, and 
AGH are responsible for treatment development. LD, CAM, and HH are responsible for coding. 
LD and CAM are responsible for data management. LD and AGH drafted the manuscript. LD is 
responsible for the data analysis and results interpretation. All authors were involved in revising 
the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.  
Ethics approval and consent to participate  
The University of California, Berkeley, Committee for the Protection of Human Subjects 
(CPHS) approved the study (protocol 2018 -05-11121 ). Verbal informed consen t/assent  is 
obtained from the parent/guardian and the adolescent  during the initial eligibility assessment 
over the telephone. This is followed by written informed consent ob tained from the 
parent/guardian as well as verbal assent from the adolescent at the beginning of the 
preassessment, which confirms eligibility, by a member of the assessment team. See 
Supplemental Material. Adverse events and other unintended effects will be report to the CPHS 
and the NIH, following the rules stipulated by these two oversight bodies. If important protocol 
modifications are made, these will be reviewed by the CPHS and reported on the trial’s 
ClinicalTrials.gov registration web page .  
Availability of data and materials  
De-identified data  concerning primary and secondary outcomes  used in the final data 
analysis will be available at  our Open Science Framework  at the end of the trial. Besides this, 
other than the authors and compliance wit h data -sharing agreements stipulated by the NIH, no 
other entities have contractual agreements with regard to access to the final dataset.  
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  22 
References  
Adan, A., Natale, V., Caci, H., & Prat, G. (2010). Relationship between circadian typology and 
functional and dysfunctional impulsivity. Chronobiology International , 27, 606 –619. 
Asarnow, L. D., McGlinchey, E., & Harvey, A. G. (2014). The Effects of Bedtim e and Sleep 
Duration on Academic and Emotional Outcomes in a Nationally Representative Sample of 
Adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health , 54, 350 –356. 
Beebe, D. W. (2011). Cognitive, Behavioral, and  Functional Consequences of Inadequate Sleep 
in Children  and Adolescents. Pediatric Clinics of North America , 58, 649 –665. 
Brand, S., Gerber, M., Hatzinger, M., Beck, J., & Holsboer -Trachsler, E. (2009). Evidence for 
similarities between adolescents and parents in sleep patterns. Sleep Medicine , 10, 1124 —
1131.  
Brand, S., Hatzinger, M., Beck, J., & Holsboer -Trachsler, E. (2009). Perceived parenting styles, 
personality traits and sleep patterns in adolescents. Journal of Adolescence , 32, 1189 –1207.  
Brooksbank, K., O’Donnell, J., Corbett, V., Shield, S., Ainsworth,  R., Shearer, R., … Logue, J. 
(2019). Discussing Weight Management With Type 2 Diabetes Patients in Primary Care 
Using the Small Talk Big Difference Intervention: Protocol for a Randomized Controlled 
Trial. JMIR Research Protocols , 8, e12162 –e12162.  
Buysse , D. J., Reynolds, C. F., Monk, T. H., Berman, S. R., Kupfer, D. J., III, C. F. R., … 
Kupfer, D. J. (1989). The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: a new instrument for psychiatric 
practice and research. Psychiatry Research , 28, 193 –213. 
Carney, C. E., Buysse, D. J., Ancoli -Israel, S., Edinger, J. D., Krystal, A. D., Lichstein, K. L., & 
Morin, C. M. (2012). The Consensus Sleep Diary: Standardizing Prospective Sleep Self -
Monitoring. Sleep , 35, 287 –302. 
Carskadon, M. A., Acebo, C., Richardso n, G. S., Tate, B. A., & Seifer, R. (1997). An Approach 
to Studying Circadian Rhythms of Adolescent Humans. Journal of Biological Rhythms , 12, 
278–289. 
Carskadon, M. A., Harvey, K., Duke, P., Anders, T. F., Litt, I. F., & Dement, W. C. (1980). 
Pubertal Cha nges in Daytime Sleepiness. Sleep , 2, 453 –460. 
Carskadon, M. A., Seifer, R., & Acebo, C. (1991). Reliability of six scales in a sleep 
questionnaire for adolescents. Sleep Research , 20, 421.  
Carskadon, M. A., Vieira, C., & Acebo, C. (1993). Association betw een puberty and delayed 
phase preference. Sleep , Vol. 16, pp. 258 –262. 
Cole, R. J., Kripke, D. F., Gruen, W., Mullaney, D. J., & Gillin, J. C. (1992). Automatic 
sleep/wake identification from wrist activity. Sleep , 15, 461 –469. 
Collins, S. E., Carey, K. B. , & Otto, J. M. (2009). A New Decisional Balance Measure of 
Motivation to Change Among At -Risk College Drinkers. Psychology of Addictive 
Behaviors , 23, 464 –471. 
Collins, S. E., Eck, S., Torchalla, I., Schröter, M., & Batra, A. (2010). Decisional balance 
proportion: Quantifying qualitative data to represent motivation to change among treatment -
seeking smokers. Drug and Alcohol Dependence , 111, 82–88. 
Crowley, S. J., Acebo, C., & Carskadon, M. A. (2007). Sleep, circadian rhythms, and delayed 
phase in adolesce nce. Sleep Medicine , 8, 602 –612. 
de la Vega, R., Tomé -Pires, C., Solé, E., Racine, M., Castarlenas, E., Jensen, M. P., & Miró, J. 
(2015). The Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index: Validity and factor structure in young people. 
Psychological Assessment , 27, e22 -7. 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  23 
Deci, E. L., Eghrari, H., Patrick, B. C., & Leone, D. R. (1994). Facilitating Internalization: The 
Self-Determination Theory Perspective. Journal of Personality , 62, 119 –142. 
Díaz‐Morales, J. F., de Leon, M. C. D., & Sorroche, M. G. (2007). Validity of t he morningness ‐
eveningness scale for children among Spanish adolescents. Chronobiology International , 
24, 435 –447. 
Dong, L., Fine, E. R., & Harvey, A. G. (2019). Leveraging Theories of Behavior Change to 
Develop and Improve Mental Health Interventions. Manuscript in Preparation . 
Dong, L., Gumport, N. B., Martinez, A. J., & Harvey, A. G. (2019). Is improving sleep and 
circadian problems in adolescence a pathway to improved health? A mediation analysis. 
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 87, 757–771. 
Dotterer, A. M., Hoffman, L., Crouter, A. C., & McHale, S. M. (2008). A Longitudinal 
Examination of the Bidirectional Links Between Academic Achievement and Parent –
Adolescent Conflict. Journal of Family Issues , 29, 762 –779. 
Edinger, J., Wyatt, J.,  Olsen, M., Stechuchak, K., Carney, C., Chiang, A., … Radtke, R. (2009). 
Reliability and Validity of the Duke Structured Interview for Sleep Disorders for Insomnia 
Screening. SLEEP , 32, A265 –A265.  
Ehrlich, K. B., Dykas, M. J., & Cassidy, J. (2012). Tipping  points in adolescent adjustment: 
Predicting social functioning from adolescents’ conflict with parents and friends. Journal of 
Family Psychology , 26, 776 –783. 
Eisenberg, N., Hofer, C., Spinrad, T. L., Gershoff, E. T., Valiente, C., Losoya, S. H., … Maxon,  
E. (2008). Understanding mother -adolescent conflict discussions: concurrent and across -
time prediction from youths’ dispositions and parenting. Monographs of the Society for 
Research in Child Development , 73, vii–viii, 1 –160. 
El-Sheikh, M., Bagley, E. J.,  Keiley, M., Elmore -Staton, L., Chen, E., & Buckhalt, J. A. (2013). 
Economic adversity and children’s sleep problems: Multiple indicators and moderation of 
effects. Health Psychology , 32, 849 –859. 
El-Sheikh, M., Kelly, R. J., Bagley, E. J., & Wetter, E. K.  (2012). Parental depressive symptoms 
and children’s sleep: The role of family conflict. Journal of Child Psychology and 
Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines , 53, 806 –814. 
El-Sheikh, M., Kouros, C. D., Erath, S., Cummings, E. M., Keller, P., & Staton, L. (2009). 
Marital conflict and children’s externalizing behavior: interactions between parasympathetic 
and sympathetic nervous system activity. Monographs of the Society for R esearch in Child 
Development , 74, vii, 1 –79. 
Erath, S. A., & Tu, K. M. (2011). The parenting context of children’s sleep. In Sleep and 
development: Familial and socio -cultural considerations  (pp. 29 –49). 
Gau, S. S. -F., Shang, C. -Y., Merikangas, K. R., Chiu , Y.-N., Soong, W. -T., & Cheng, A. T. -A. 
(2007). Association between Morningness -Eveningness and Behavioral/Emotional 
Problems among Adolescents. Journal of Biological Rhythms , 22, 268 –274. 
Gavin, L. E., Williams, J. R., Rivera, M. I., & Lachance, C. R. (2 015). Programs to Strengthen 
Parent -Adolescent Communication about Reproductive Health: A Systematic Review. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine , 49, S65 –S72. 
Goldstein, D., Hahn, C. S., Hasher, L., Wiprzycka, U. J., & Zelazo, P. D. (2007). Time of day , 
intellectual performance, and behavioral problems in Morning versus Evening type 
adolescents: Is there a synchrony effect? Personality and Individual Differences . 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.paid.2006.07.008  
Gradisar, M., Wolfson, A. R., Harvey, A. G., Hal e, L., Rosenberg, R., & Czeisler, C. A. (2013). 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  24 
The sleep and technology use of Americans: Findings from the National Sleep Foundation’s 
2011 sleep in America poll. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine , 9, 1291 –1299.  
Harvey, A. G. (2016). A Transdiagnostic I ntervention for Youth Sleep and Circadian Problems. 
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice , 23, 341 –355. 
Harvey, A. G., & Buysse, D. J. (2017). Treating Sleep Problems: A Transdiagnostic Approach . 
New York, NY: The Guilford Press.  
Harvey, A. G., Hein, K., Dolse n, M. R., Dong, L., Rabe -Hesketh, S., Gumport, N. B., … Blum, 
D. J. (2018). Modifying the Impact of Eveningness Chronotype (“Night -Owls”) in Youth: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent 
Psychiatry , 57, 742–754. 
Hessler, D. M., & Katz, L. F. (2010). Brief report: Associations between emotional competence 
and adolescent risky behavior. Journal of Adolescence , 33, 241 –246. 
Hetherington, E. M. (2008). Coping with marital transitions: A family systems perspec tive. 
Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 57, 1–14. 
Insel, T. R. (2015). The NIMH experimental medicine initiative. World Psychiatry , 14, 151 –153. 
Jaccard, J., & Dittus, P. (1991). Parent -Teen Communication: Toward the Prevention o f 
Unintended Pregnancies . New York, NY: Springer -Verlag.  
Jaccard, J., & Levitz, N. (2015). Parent -based interventions to reduce adolescent problem 
behaviors: New directions for self -regulation approaches. In G. Oettingen & P. M. 
Gollwitzer (Eds.), Self-Regulation in Adolescence  (pp. 357 –389). Cambridge University 
Press.  
Johnson, N. L., Kirchner, H. L., Rosen, C. L., Storfer -Isser, A., Cartar, L. N., Ancoli -Israel, 
S., … Redline, S. (2007). Sleep estimation using wrist actigraphy in adolescents with and 
without sleep disordered breathing: a comparison of three data modes. Sleep , 30, 899 –905. 
Kaufman, J., Birmaher, B., Brent, D., Rao, U., Flynn, C., Moreci, P., … Ryan, N. (1997). 
Schedule for Affective Disorders and Schizophrenia for School -Age Children -Presen t and 
Lifetime Version (K -SADS -PL): initial reliability and validity data. Journal of the 
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry , 36, 980 –988. 
Kerr, M., Stattin, H., & Özdemir, M. (2012). Perceived parenting style and adolescent 
adjustment: Re visiting directions of effects and the role of parental knowledge. 
Developmental Psychology , 48, 1540 –1552.  
Kim, S., Dueker, G. L., Hasher, L., & Goldstein, D. (2002). Children’s time of day preference: 
age, gender and ethnic differences. Personality and I ndividual Differences , 33, 1083 –1090.  
Klahr, A. M., Rueter, M. A., McGue, M., Iacono, W. G., & Alexandra Burt, S. (2011). The 
relationship between parent -child conflict and adolescent antisocial behavior: Confirming 
shared environmental mediation. Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology , 39, 683 –694. 
Lohaus, A., Vierhaus, M., & Ball, J. (2009). Parenting Styles and Health -Related Behavior in 
Childhood and Early Adolescence. The Journal of Early Adolescence , 29, 449 –475. 
Matricciani, L., Blunden, S., Rigney, G. , Williams, M. T., & Olds, T. S. (2013). Children’s sleep 
needs: is there sufficient evidence to recommend optimal sleep for children? Sleep , 36, 527 –
534. 
McAuley, E. D., Duncan, T., & Tammen, V. V. (1989). Psychometric properties of the intrinsic 
motivati on inventoiy in a competitive sport setting: A confirmatory factor analysis. 
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport , 60, 48–58. 
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Whittington, C., McAteer, J., & Gupta, S. (2009). Effective techniques 
in healthy eating and physica l activity interventions: A meta -regression. Health Psychology , 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  25 
28, 690 –701. 
Michie, S., Atkins, L., & West, R. (2014). The Behaviour Change Wheel: A Guide to Designing 
Interventions . Great Britain: Silverback Publishing.  
Michie, S., Churchill, S., & West,  R. (2011). Identifying Evidence -Based Competences Required 
to Deliver Behavioural Support for Smoking Cessation. Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 41, 
59–70. 
Michie, S., Richardson, M., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Francis, J., Hardeman, W., … Wood, C. 
E. (2013). The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered 
techniques: Building an international consensus for the reporting of behavior  change 
interventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 46, 81–95. 
Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., & West, R. (2011). The behaviour change wheel: A new method 
for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions. Implementation Science , 6, 
42. 
Michie, S., Wood, C. E., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Francis, J. J., & Hardeman, W. (2015). 
Behaviour change techniques: the development and evaluation of a taxonomic method for 
reporting and describing behaviour change interventions (a suite of five studie s involving 
consensus methods, randomised controlled trials and analysis of qualitative da. Health 
Technology Assessment , 19, 1–188. 
Miller, A. L., Lumeng, J. C., & LeBourgeois, M. K. (2015). Sleep patterns and obesity in 
childhood. Current Opinion in Endo crinology & Diabetes and Obesity , 22, 41–47. 
Negriff, S., Dorn, L. D., Pabst, S. R., & Susman, E. J. (2011). Morningness/eveningness, 
pubertal timing, and substance use in adolescent girls. Psychiatry Research , 185, 408 –413. 
Pearson, N., Atkin, A. J., Bidd le, S. J. H., Gorely, T., & Edwardson, C. (2010). Parenting styles, 
family structure and adolescent dietary behaviour. Public Health Nutrition , 13, 1245 –1253.  
Piko, B. F., & Balázs, M. Á. (2012). Authoritative parenting style and adolescent smoking and 
drinking. Addictive Behaviors , 37, 353 –356. 
Prinz, R. J., Foster, S., Kent, R. N., & O’Leary, K. D. (1979). Multivariate assessment of conflict 
in distressed and nondistressed mother -adolescent dyads. Journal of Applied Behavior 
Analysis , 12, 1311489.  
Prinz, R. J., & Kent, R. N. (1978). Recording parent -adolescent interactions without the use of 
frequency or interval -by-interval coding. Behavior Therapy , 9, 602 –604. 
Reimuller, A., Hussong, A., & Ennett, S. T. (2011). The Influence of Alcohol -Specific 
Communica tion on Adolescent Alcohol Use and Alcohol -Related Consequences. 
Prevention Science , 12, 389 –400. 
Robin, A. L., & Foster, S. L. (1989). Negotiating parent -adolescent conflict: A behavioral -family 
systems approach . New York, NY: Guildford Press.  
Roenneberg,  T., Kuehnle, T., Pramstaller, P. P., Ricken, J., Havel, M., Guth, A., & Merrow, M. 
(2004). A marker for the end of adolescence. Current Biology , 14, R1038 –R1039.  
Sadeh, A., Sharkey, K. M., & Carskadon, M. A. (1994). Activity -based sleep -wake 
identificatio n: an empirical test of methodological issues. Sleep , 17, 201 –207. 
Sawyer, S. M., Azzopardi, P. S., Wickremarathne, D., & Patton, G. C. (2018). The age of 
adolescence. The Lancet Child & Adolescent Health , 2, 223 –228. 
Saxbe, D. E., Ramos, M. R., Timmons, A . C., Rodriguez, A. R., & Margolin, G. (2014). A path 
modeling approach to understanding family conflict: Reciprocal patterns of parent coercion 
and adolescent avoidance. Journal of Family Psychology , 28, 415 –420. 
Schaal, S., Peter, M., & Randler, C. (2010). Morningness ‐eveningness and physical activity in 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  26 
adolescents. International Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology , 8, 147 –159. 
Schuster, M. A., Corona, R., Elliott, M. N., Kanouse, D. E., Eastman, K. L., Zhou, A. J., & 
Klein, D. J. (2008). Evalu ation of Talking Parents, Healthy Teens, a new worksite based 
parenting programme to promote parent -adolescent communication about sexual health: 
randomised controlled trial. BMJ , 337, a308 –a308.  
Shahid, A., Wilkinson, K., Marcu, S., & Shapiro, C. M. (2011 ). Columbia -Suicide Severity 
Rating Scale (C -SSRS)  (A. Shahid, K. Wilkinson, S. Marcu, & C. M. Shapiro, Eds.). New 
York, NY: Springer New York.  
Short, M. A., Arora, T., Gradisar, M., Taheri, S., & Carskadon, M. A. (2017). How Many Sleep 
Diary Entries Are N eeded to Reliably Estimate Adolescent Sleep? Sleep , 40. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsx006  
Short, M. A., Gradisar, M., Lack, L. C., & Wright, H. R. (2013). The impact of sleep on 
adolescent depressed mood, alertness and academic performance. Journal of A dolescence , 
36, 1025 –1033.  
Smetana, J. G., Campione -Barr, N., & Metzger, A. (2006). Adolescent Development in 
Interpersonal and Societal Contexts. Annual Review of Psychology , 57, 255 –284. 
St. George, S. M., Wilson, D. K., Schneider, E. M., & Alia, K. A. ( 2013). Project SHINE: 
Effects of Parent -Adolescent Communication on Sedentary Behavior in African American 
Adolescents. Journal of Pediatric Psychology , 38, 997 –1009.  
Steinberg, L., Dahl, R., Keating, D., Kupfer, D. J., Masten, A. S., & Pine, D. S. (2015).  The 
Study of Developmental Psychopathology in Adolescence: Integrating Affective 
Neuroscience with the Study of Context. In Developmental Psychopathology  (pp. 710 –741). 
Hoboken, NJ, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  
Tarokh, L., Saletin, J. M., & Carskadon, M. A. (2016). Sleep in adolescence: Physiology, 
cognition and mental health. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews , 70, 182 –188. 
Walsh, D. M. J., Moran, K., Cornelissen, V., Buys, R., Claes, J., Zampognaro, P., … Woods, C. 
B. (2019). The development and codesi gn of the PATHway intervention: a theory -driven 
eHealth platform for the self -management of cardiovascular disease. Translational 
Behavioral Medicine , 9, 76–98. 
White, J. (2012). The contribution of parent -child interactions to smoking experimentation in 
adolescence: implications for prevention. Health Education Research , 27, 46–56. 
Widman, L., Choukas -Bradley, S., Noar, S. M., Nesi, J., & Garrett, K. (2016). Parent -Adolescent 
Sexual Communication and Adolescent Safer Sex Behavior: AMeta -Analysis. JAMA 
Pediatrics , 170, 52–61. 
Wilson, H. W., & Donenberg, G. (2004). Quality of parent communication about sex and its 
relationship to risky sexual behavior among youth in psychiatric care: a pilot study. Journal 
of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, and Allied Discip lines , 45, 387 –395. 
Wolfson, A. R., & Carskadon, M. A. (2003). Understanding adolescents’ sleep patterns and 
school performance: A critical appraisal. Sleep Medicine Reviews , 7, 491 –506. 
PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  27 
 
Figure 1 . Predicted outcomes  of the Parent Behavior Change Intervention (PBC -I) on teen sleep-
promoting behavior . *Denotes the predictions tested in the proposed 2 -year trial. BCT = 
behavior change technique; TPB = theory of planned behavior ; SRT = self-regulation theory ; 
OLT = operant learning theory ; RPT = relapse prevention theory. Examples of candidate BCTs 
based on Michie, Hardeman, Fanshawe et al. (2008 ) (and in general) refer  to the Hot Topic s 
Task assessment , which will index the broader impacts, beyond sleep, of the PBC -I. 
 
 
 
  

PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  28 
 
 
 
 
Figur e 2. Summary of the experimental medicine approach. PBC -I = Parent Behavior Change  
Intervention; TranS -C = Transdiagnostic Sleep and Circadian Intervention; BCT = behavior 
change technique; PSQI = Pittsburgh Sleep Quality Index.  
 
  

PARENT -ADOLESCENT  CONVERSATION  AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE  29 
Table 1 
Summary of Primary and Secondary Outcomes  
Domain s Primary outcomes  Secondary outcomes  
Parent -adolescent  
communication   Number of BCTs used by 
parent coded from the Hot 
Topics Task (parent)   Type of BCTs used by parent 
coded from the Hot Topics Task  
(parent)  
 Number of negative and 
positive communication 
behaviors coded from the Hot 
Topics Task  (parent)  
 
Coercion and conflict 
questionnaires   Parent perception of general 
conflict between parent and 
child measured with Conflict 
Behavior Questionnaire 
(parent)  
  Youth's perception of general 
conflict between parent and 
child measured with Conflict 
Behavior Questionnaire (youth)  
 
Teen motivation 
questionnaires   Decisional balance 
proportion measured with 
Decision Balance Worksheet 
(youth)  
  Youth self -reported moti vation 
for participating in TranS -C and 
for making sleep behavior 
changes measured with the 
Intrinsic Motivation 
Questionnaire  (youth)  
 
Sleep -promoting 
behaviors   N/A  Regularity in sleep midpoint 
across the week measured with 
daily sleep diary  (youth)  
 Regularity in sleep midpoint 
across the week measured with 
actigraphy (youth)  
 
Sleep  and circadian 
functioning   Subjective sleep quality 
measured with Pittsburgh 
Sleep Quality Index global 
score (youth)   Morningness/eveningness 
preference measured with 
Children's Morningness -
Eveningness Preference Scale  
(youth)  
 
 
Note.  BCT = behavior change technique; TranS -C = Transdiagnostic Sleep and Circadian 
Intervention; N/A = not applicable.  
