STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
A cluster randomized trial to evaluate external
support for the implementation of positive
behavioral interventions and supports by school
personnel
Ricardo Eiraldi1,2,3*, Barry McCurdy5, Muniya Khanna1, Jennifer Mautone1, Abbas F Jawad3, Thomas Power1,2,3,
Zuleyha Cidav4, Jaclyn Cacia1and George Sugai6
Abstract
Background: Urban schools lag behind non-urban schools in attending to the behavioral health needs of their
students. This is especially evident with regard to the level of use of evidence-based interventions with school children.
Increased used of evidence-based interventions in urban schools would contribute to reducing mental health services
disparities in low-income communities. School-wide positive behavioral interventions and supports (SWPBIS) is a service
delivery framework that can be used to deliver universal preventive interventions and evidence-based behavioral health
treatments, such as group cognitive behavioral therapy. In this article, we describe our ongoing research on creating
internal capacity for program implementation. We also examine the cost-effectiveness and resulting school climate
when two different levels of external support are provided to personnel as they implement a two-tier SWPBIS program.
Methods/Design: The study follows six K –8 schools in the School District of Philadelphia randomly assigned to
consultation support or consultation-plus-coaching support. Participants are: approximately 48 leadership team
members, 180 school staff and 3,900 students in Tier 1, and 12 counselors, and 306 child participants in Tier 2.
Children who meet inclusion criteria for Tier 2 will participate in group cognitive behavioral therapy for externalizing or
anxiety disorders. The study has three phases, baseline/training, implementation, and sustainability. We will measure
implementation outcomes, service outcomes, child outcomes, and cost.
Discussion: Findings from this study will provide evidence as to the appropriateness of school-wide prevention and
treatment service delivery models for addressing services disparities in schools. The effectiveness and cost-effectiveness
analyses of the two levels of training and consultation should help urban school districts and policymakers with the
planning and deployment of cost-effective strategies for the implementation of evidence-based interventions for some
of the most common behavioral health problems in school children.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01941069
Keywords: Implementation, Sustainability, Fidelity, Mental health services disparities, Behavioral health, Urban schools,
School-wide positive behavioral interventions and supports
* Correspondence: eiraldi@mail.med.upenn.edu
1Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
The Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3440 Market St, Philadelphia, PA
19104-3306, USA
2Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, The Children ’s Hospital
of Philadelphia, 3550 Market St, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3303, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2014 Eiraldi et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
Background
Services disparities
Several epidemiologic studies have shown that only one in
five children with emotiona l and behavioral disorders
receive mental health services [1-3]. Low-income and
ethnically diverse children lag well behind their middleclass, Caucasian counterparts in rate of service utilization
[3,4]. Access barriers, such as lack of specialized services in
low-income communities, high cost,and poor service qual-ity, and stigma have been found to affect service utilization
by ethnically diverse children [5-9]. Service delivery strat-
egies that address access barriers and minimize the effectsof stigma are likely to reduce service disparities [10].
Schools ’role in reducing mental health disparities
Services provided in school settings are ideal for identifying
and supporting children at risk for mental disorders [11]
and for advancing the goal of reducing and eliminatingservices disparities because they are available to all children.
Services are offered in convenient, close to home locations,
are often provided at little or no cost to the families, andcan be provided while the child is attending school [12-14].
School-based services reduce the stigma associated with
seeking mental health services [15] and also afford theopportunity to serve children who are at risk for mental
disorders [16-18]. As such, schools can play a significant
role in addressing mental health services disparities inlow-income urban communities [19,20].
Externalizing and anxiety disorders
Aggressive, defiant, disruptiv e and antisocial behavior such
as the behavior seen in children with, or at risk for, ex-
ternalizing behavior disorders —i.e., Oppositional Defiant
Disorder (ODD), Conduct Disorder (CD) —have a lifetime
prevalence of approximately 10% [21,22] and are highly
prevalent in school settings [23-25]. These disordershave been found to lead to academic underachievement,
grade retention, school suspension and expulsion, and
later problems with the law [26-28]. Early onset of aggres-sive and antisocial behavior in elementary school has been
found to be related to a persistent and chronic trajectory
of antisocial behavior into middle childhood and adult-hood [29,30].
Anxiety disorders —i.e., Generalized Anxiety Disorder
(GAD), Social Phobia (SP), Separation Anxiety Disorder(SAD) —affect up to 13% of the child population [31,32].
Anxious children are much more likely than non-anxious
children to have problems with social and peer relations[33,34], academic achievement [35], school refusal [36,37]
and future socio-emotional adjustment [38,39]. Children
with GAD, SAD, and SP share the same underlyingconstruct of anxiety [40,41], evidence a very high comor-
bidity rate and have been reported to respond similarly to
treatment regardless of which disorder is principal [42,43].Anxiety disorders are highly prevalent among inner city
school children [44-46]. Urban children are especially at
risk for anxiety because of the deleterious effects of livingin unsafe and deprived neighborhoods [47].
School-wide positive behavioral interventions and
supports (SWPBIS)
SWPBIS is an integrated service delivery framework that
targets changes in school clim ate by creating improved sys-
tems and procedures [48,49]. The practices and systems
of SWPBIS are organized along a three-tiered continuumof prevention with a behavioral theoretical orientation and
the empirical foundation of applied behavior analysis (ABA).
Primary prevention strateg ies focus on preventing new
cases of problem behaviors by using school-wide (Tier
1, universal) strategies, such as school-wide discipline,
classroom behavior management, and effective instructionalpractices. Emphasis is placed on teaching all students
key behavioral expectations and routines and creating
a proactive means of communication for students andschool staff. Randomized clinical trials have shown
that schools employing SWPBIS have demonstrated better
school climate ( e.g., fewer student disciplinary problems),
higher levels of perceived school safety as reported by
students and staff, greater reductions in the number of
office discipline referrals (ODR), and improved readingscores compared to schools that did not use SWPBIS
and/or did not implement SWPBIS with fidelity [48,50-54].
Some SWPBIS programs also offer targeted group-basedsupport for at risk children (Tier 2, secondary prevention)
and individualized support for more severe cases (Tier
3, tertiary prevention). In the present study, childrenwho exhibit need for more targeted support will be of-
fered participation in group cognitive behavioral therapy
(GCBT) interventions for externalizing behavior problemsor anxiety.
GCBT for externalizing and anxiety problems
The Coping Power Program CPP; [55], a GCBT interven-
tion, has been found to be effective at reducing aggressive
behavior, covert delinquent behavior and substance abuseamong aggressive boys [56]. Studies using a briefer version
of CPP (Anger Coping) also reported significant reductions
in aggressive behavior at post -intervention among targeted
aggressive boys, compared to untreated aggressive boys
and normal controls [57,58]. Another GCBT intervention,
Friends for Life FRIENDS; [59], has been proven to beeffective for the prevention and treatment of GAD, SAD,
and SP [60-63]. For example, in a randomized trial with
children diagnosed with an anxiety disorder, 76% of chil-dren assigned to FRIENDS were diagnosis free at the end
of the 10-week trial compared to 6% of children assigned
to a wait-list condition [63].Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 2 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
Use of school personnel for implementation of
evidence-based interventions (EBIs)
A number of recent studies have shown that school
personnel can be successfully trained in the development
and implementation of SWPBIS [48,50,64] and GCBT for
externalizing and anxiety disorders [65-68], respectively.
Also, SWPBIS has been successfully implemented in a
number of inner city schools around the country [69,70].
Unfortunately, school pers onnel and school counselors
often lack adequate training in the implementation of
SWPBIS and other EBIs. In addition, schools in urban
settings often do not have adequate funding to contract
mental health professionals to provide child services.
T h ep r e s e n ts t u d yd i r e c t l ya d d r e s s e st h e s ei m p o r t a n t
barriers by enhancing school capacity to deploy EBIs.
Theoretical framework
We developed and pilot-tested the program in two K –8
schools that have the same ethnic and socio-economic
breakdown as the schools participating in this study.
The project was funded by the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC; RFA-CD-08-001; Elimination of
health disparities through translation research; R18 ). The
adaptation and testing of the interventions used in the
study were organized around the first three steps of the
Public Health Model ( i.e., Defining the problem; Identi-
fying causes/risk factors; Developing and testing the
intervention) See, [71-73] (see Figure 1). Specifically, we
collected needs assessment data, assessed symptom profile
and mental health service utilization of typical students in
the participating schools, investigated risk and protectivefactors, conducted a review of EBIs for ethnically-diverse
children, selected and adapted interventions based on
the characteristics of the student population and specific
constraints of under-resourced schools, and pilot-tested
SWPBIS and EBIs for externalizing behavior problems and
anxiety (Eiradi et. al., Development and implementation of
a SWPBIS program with mental health supports in urban
schools, submitted) [74]. The present study will extend
this work by addressing the fourth step (Implementing the
intervention/measuring effectiveness) of the Public Health
Model [71]. Outcome measures for the present study were
selected based on the implementation framework devel-
oped by Proctor and colleagues [75,76], including the
assessment of implementation outcomes, service outcomes,
and child outcomes (see Figure 1).
Study aims
The specific aims of the study are:
1. To determine whether program content and process
fidelity for Tier 1 (for all students) and Tier 2 (for at
risk and high risk students) differ between schools
receiving a higher level of support (Consultation plus
Coaching, C + C) and schools receiving a lower level of
support (Consultation, C) for program implementers.
2. To determine whether school climate, office
discipline referrals, and participants ’diagnostic
status, symptom and impairment severity, coping
skills, and academic productivity differ between
schools receiving different levels of support
(C or C + C).
Development and Evaluation of 
Interventions
What works and for whom?
Review of EBIs
Adapt and pilot-test multi-tier 
school-wide interventionImplementation / Measuring 
Effectiveness
Does it meet intended needs?
Implementation outcomes
- Fidelity, dosage, cost
Service outcomes
- Health disparities 
Child outcomes
- Mental health, academicIdentifying Causes/Risk Factors
What are the causes?
Data synthesis
Integration of local data with 
research literatureDefining the Problem
What is the problem?
Surveillance at the community level12
3 4
Figure 1 Public health model for project development and implementation. Adapted from Kutash, K., Duchnowski, A. J., & Lynn, N. (2006).
School-based mental health: An empirical guide for decision-makers. Tampa, FL: University of South Florida, The Louis de la Parte Florida Mental
Health Institute, Department of Child & Family Studies, Research and Training Center for Children ’s Mental Health.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 3 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
3. To assess changes in mental health disparities
brought about by Tier 1 (perception of school
climate, student suspension rates) and Tier 2
(proportion of students with unmet need),
respectively.
4. To determine the incremental cost-effectiveness of
SWPBIS C versus SWPBIS C + C.
Study fit with the funding opportunity
The study is aligned with the funding opportunity PAR-
11-104, Reducing health disparities among minority and
underserved children (R01) , in that it evaluates the com-
parative effectiveness of two levels of support for school
personnel for the implementation of a continuum of mental
health prevention strategies for low-income, ethnically
diverse children in non-traditional service settings.
Methods/Design
Six K –8 schools in the School District of Philadelphia were
randomly assigned to either Consultation or Consultation
plus Coaching (See Figure 2). A stratified random assign-
ment list of schools to condition was generated using a
computerized random assignment program [77]. Schools
were stratified to group one if their baseline School
Climate (CREST) scores were below the median CREST
scores or to group two if the CREST scores ≥the median
value. The units of analyses for Tier 1 are all of the stu-
dents in those K-8 schools (650 per school), leadership
team members (eight per school) and other school staff
(30 per school). The units of analyses for Tier 2 are the
children meeting criteria for inclusion in one of the GCBT
groups (enroll a total of 367 students assuming a 17%
dropout; approximately 51 eligible students per school),
the school counselors (two per school) conducting the
GCBT groups, and the groups themselves (14 per school;
see Table 1).
Participants
Tier 1 research activities will include 48 teachers, adminis-
trators and parents in the leadership teams, 180 school staff
for the assessment of school climate, and approximately
3,900 students. Participants in Tier 2 will be 12 counselorsand approximately 306 evaluable children who have, or
are at risk for, externalizing or anxiety disorders. School
personnel will provide all services. Information pertaining
to each school will be considered nested within school
‘cluster ’and will be defined as such in the statistical
analyses.
Inclusion criteria
All children will participate in Tier 1. Children in grades
4–8, who meet screening and diagnostic criteria will be
included in Tier 2. The screening criterion is a score ≥1
SD on the Conduct Problems or Emotional Symptoms
scales of the Strengths and D ifficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ), a widely-used screening instrument [78], filled
out by a teacher. Children meeting screening criterion
will undergo a diagnostic evaluation. Children meeting
primary diagnosis of ODD, CD, GAD, SAD, or SP (based
on a parent structured interview [79] and a symptom
severity scale [80] filled out by an independent rater) at
Intermediate or Positive level will be eligible for participa-
tion. Children with comorbid (secondary) conditions will
be included.
Exclusion criteria
There are no exclusion criteria for Tier 1. Children with a
Special Education classification of Intellectual Disability,
as well as those who are not able to communicate in
English, do not have a principal diagnosis of ODD, CD,
Retraining Retraining Retraining Retraining
C + C = Consultation plus Coaching Support ||    C= Coaching SupportPre-Funding
Activities 
(6 months)C + C C
C C
1 2 3 4 5IMPLEMENTATION SUSTAINABILITY
Randomization
School Preparation
Training(3 schools)
(3 schools)BASELINE
Figure 2 Study design and timeline.Table 1 Participants by Tier and support level
Consultation Consultation
plus coachingTotal
Tier 1
Students 1,950 1,950 3,900
Leadership team
members24 24 48
School staff 90 90 180
Tier 2
Students 153 153 306
Counselors 6 6 12
Intervention groups 42 42 84Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 4 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
S A D ,G A Do rS Po ra r en o ta tr i s kf o ro n eo ft h o s ed i s o r -
ders, have an accumulated absenteeism record of ≥33% for
the current year, or have a history of psychotic or autisticspectrum disorders, will be excluded from Tier 2.
Linkage between Tier 1 and Tier 2
The leadership teams and the counselors will manage the
SWPBIS program. They will be in charge of identifying,
eliminating, or consolidating e xisting school-wide interven-
tions that could overlap or interfere with the implementa-
tion of SWPBIS. Existing behavioral health services for
individual students ( e.g., wrap-around services) will be
m a i n t a i n e db e c a u s et h e yw i l ln o ti n t e r f e r ew i t hS W P B I S .
The leadership teams in each school will develop all inter-
ventions for Tier 1 while receiving C or C + C. A subcom-mittee within the leadership team composed of a counselor
and an administrator will be in charge of identifying and
referring children for participation in Tier 2. Followingmethods used in other studies [81] each teacher will be
asked to rank the children in their classroom from least
to most difficulty with externalizing behavior or anxietyand then to refer the top three children with externalizing
behavior problems and top three children with excessive
anxiety for possible participation in Tier 2. Decisions as tothe appropriateness of referrals to Tier 2 will be based
on data gathered via teacher ratings on the SDQ [78]
and a web-based software system [82] for collecting andsummarizing office discipline referrals.
Setting
The SWPBIS project will be implemented in six K –8p u b l i c
schools in North Philadelphia, PA, a low-income area that
has the second highest level of food insecurity in the coun-try [83]. The ethnic makeup of students is approximately
60% Latino, 30% African American, 10% other minority.
Training and consultation to leadership teams and
counselors
The training model assumes that participating school
personnel will need initial training during the first year
of the project and briefer retraining each subsequent year.
Members of the research team will conduct three days offormal initial training and one day of retraining each with
members of the leadership team (LT) and counselors. The
training will be delivered using procedures employed indissemination and implementation studies in nontraditional
settings ( i.e., initial workshop and subsequent ongoing
consultation) [68,84] and other strategies found to beeffective according to a recent meta analysis ( i.e., active
learning strategies) [85].
External coaches
The support conditions (C, C + C) were modeled after
procedures developed by John Lochman and colleaguesfor the training of school counselors in the context of a
dissemination study with the Coping Power Program [68]
and recommendations from a recent meta analysis [85].Consultation will be provided by ‘coaches ’who will be
advanced trainees ( e.g., interns, fellows) in applied psych-
ology. After initial training, which will be the same for Cand C + C, the Tier 1C + C Coaches will conduct one-hour
biweekly on-site consultat ion with members of the LT to
help them develop and implement universal interventionsthroughout the school as delineated in the SWPBIS Team
Training Manual [86]. Progress toward the completion of
each step in the SWPBIS Team Training Manual will beassessed monthly via the Team Implementation Checklist
(TIC) and PBIS Action Plan [87] completed by members of
the LT and reviewed by the Tier 1 Coach. In addition,the Tier 1 Coaches will be available to the head of the
LT for scheduled one-on-one performance feedback and
as needed one-on-one consulta tion (via telephone or email)
about implementation barrier s (Individualized Problem
Solving). The Tier 1C Coaches will supply the LT an online
guide containing steps for the development and implemen-tation of universal interventions. Also, the Tier 1C Coaches
will have one-hour biweekly monthly phone conferences
with the head of the LT in which progress in completingthe steps needed for the development and implementation
of interventions as measured via the TIC and PBIS Action
Plan will be discussed.
After the initial training related to Tier 2 interventions,
which will be the same for C and C + C counselors, the
Tier 2C + C Coaches will conduct 14, two-hour weeklyon-site consultation sessions with counselors to debrief
previous CPP and FRIENDS sessions, observe child group
sessions, prepare for upcoming sessions, and conductproblem solving concerning barriers and challenges in the
implementation of the protocols. Counselors will receive
video-recorded samples of effective implementation of themain components of the treatments ( e.g., exposure for
anxiety). Tier 2C + C Coaches will also provide individual
performance feedback to the counselors after the sessionis over and will be available to counselors as needed (via
telephone or email) for one-on-one consultation about
implementation barriers (Individualized Problem Solving).
Tier 2C Coaches will conduct two-hour weekly consult-
ation sessions using the same group content and formatand they will provide counselors video-recorded samples
of effective implementation of the main components of the
treatments. However, they will not observe group sessionsor offer individualized feedback or individualized support
to counselors.
School recruitment
Upon receiving funding, a presentation of the projectwas conducted with a preselected group of school admin-
istrators from schools in the regional area of interest.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 5 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
Presentations were conducted in person and via GoTo-
Meeting. Those who expressed interest in taking part in
the project were asked to respond to a brief request forproposals (RFP). The six schools that applied met the
minimal inclusion criteria, so the search was discontinued
at this stage. The inclusion criteria included: grade level(any elementary or middle school combination); students ’
socio-economic status (percentage of students eligible for
free/subsided lunch set at ≥90%); racial/ethnic diversity
(majority of students are of minority status); and school-
wide initiatives (absence of current mental health preven-
tion initiatives). A more in-dep th description of the project
was provided during staff meetings and a vote was taken.
At least 80% of school staff in attendance was required to
vote affirmatively in order for the school to join the project.This is a standard cut-off in SWPBIS [88]. Subsequently,
the investigators trained members of the leadership teams.
As of this writing, the leadership teams are developinginterventions for Tier 1 while receiving C or C + C.
Measures
We employ two measures to help us determine the readi-
ness of school personnel for implementing Tier 1 and Tier
2 interventions. Members of the leadership teams willcomplete a 23-item checklist [87] to assess completion of
activities related to critical features of the SWPBIS model,
including regular meetings of the LT and the use of discip-line data ( e.g., events, dates and time, student, in and out of
school suspensions) for program planning and to monitor
the schools ’progress in implementing their SWPBIS Action
Plan [48]. Members of the leadership teams will complete
the instrument monthly; it will also be used by the External
Coach to guide members of the LT in developing andimplementing Tier 1 inter ventions in their school.
For Tier 2, following the initial workshop, trainers will
assess whether counselors have learned the theoreticalunderpinnings of CBT and the treatment of anxiety and
depression in children. We will use a questionnaire [89]
developed for the assessment of knowledge of EBIs inthe treatment of youth psychopathology. Counselors will
complete the questionnaire right after the initial and last
workshop. Counselors scoring below the 80% cutoff willbe provided further individual training in the areas in
which they scored low.
Screening, demographics, service utilization
Counselors will ask teachers to complete the SDQ, a
mental health screening questionnaire [78,90,91], forchildren who accumulate ≥3 ODRs or who are re-
ferred by a subcommittee of the LT charged with mon-
itoring at-risk children. Children who score ≥1 SD [92]
on the Conduct Problems or Emotional Symptoms scales
will be invited to participa te in a thorough diagnostic
assessment.Implementation outcome measures
Fidelity
Delivering content as originally intended by the treatment
developers (content fidelity) leads to better outcomes [93].
Also, delivering content while actively engaging clients in
therapy and doing it with a sense of competence (processfidelity) leads to better adherence and outcomes [94-97].
A group of 20 randomly selected teachers, other school
personnel and students will be interviewed at the end ofeach project year in order to assess content fidelity for
Tier 1 [98]. Data sources are direct observations, review
of school policies and interviews with school staff andstudents [99]. A cut-off score of 80% on the measure
will be used for determining successful implementation
of SWPBIS [98].
A checklist reflecting each activity component of the
session agenda or outline for CPP and FRIENDS will be
used to assess content fidelity for Tier 2. All treatmentsessions will be video recorded. Independent coders (ICs)
will use a yes-no response scale to indicate whether or not
a counselor covered a particular component. Two ICswill complete the checklist after observing video recorded
sessions. Differences of within 5% between the 2 ICs will
be considered an agreement. We will report the averagescore between the two ICs.
Our process fidelity checklist is based on a 12-item
measure developed by John Lochman and colleagues ( e.g.,
Counselor ’s tone is warm and positive). We will use the
total score (Overall Process Fidelity) [68]. Twenty percent
of sessions one, two, three, and four will be coded, while30% of sessions five through 14 will be coded by 2 ICs.
Differences of within one point between the two ICs will
be considered an agreement. We will report the averagescore between the two ICs.
Process evaluation
We will conduct focus groups with members of the
leadership teams and other school personnel at the end of
each project year in order to assess perceptions of theappropriateness of C and C + C level of support for the
implementation of SWPBIS.
Children ’s functioning
We will collect children ’s academic performance, absentee-
ism, and office discipline referrals (ODR) throughoutthe five years of the project. Absenteeism data will be
collected from the school ’s daily attendance records.
Academic performance will be taken from the state ’s
mandatory testing for reading and math for all students.
ODRs will be collected using a web-based system for
monitoring ODRs to assist in intervention planning andevaluation [100]. These data will be used for determining
inclusion into Tier 2 and to measure outcomes. We will
also record in- and out-of-school suspensions per 100Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 6 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
students per year and percentage of students receiving
suspensions. These indices are reliable and valid for meas-
uring intervention effects [82].
School climate
Perception of school climate will be assessed via a question-naire [101] completed by 30 school staff per school (equal
proportion of teachers, suppor t staff and administrators)
chosen at random in year one. The same school staff ineach school will subsequently complete the survey at
the end of each project year. The questionnaire has four
factors: Skill Instruction; Support for Staff; Staff Respectfor Students; and Safety. We will use all four factors in
the analyses.
Mental health disparities
We will measure changes in mental health disparities as
a result of Tier 1 interventions by comparing scores onschool climate and school suspension rates between year
one (baseline) and each subsequent year across all schools.
Changes in mental health services disparities as a result ofTier 2 interventions will be assessed via a semi-structured
service utilization interview [102,103] administered to the
parents of children in Tier 2 across all schools betweenthe baseline and intervention phases.
Child outcome measures for at risk/high risk children
Children ’s diagnostic status, mental health symptoms,
coping skills and functional impairment will be assessed
at pre- and post-participation in CPP and FRIENDS. All
of the parent measures are available in Spanish. Diagnosticstatus will be assessed via a comp uterized parent-structured
interview [79,104]. This instrum ent reports three levels of
diagnostic severity for each diso rder: Positive, Intermediate
(at-risk), or Negative. Upon completion of the structured
interview, the independent evaluator (IE) will assign inter-
ference scores to each positive diagnosis in order to deter-mine primary and secondary diagnoses [80], based on a
seven-point scale, with lower sco res indicating less severity.
Changes in coping skills will be assessed via a 34-item self-report questionnaire [105] that measures coping strategies
(seeking social support, self-reliance/problem-solving,
distancing, internalizing, and externalizing). The total scorefor this measure will be used in outcome analyses.
Changes in mental health symptoms ( e.g., aggression,
conduct problems, anxiety, somatic symptoms) will be
measured via parent [106], child [107,108] and teacher
[106] multi-axial rating scales. Teachers will also provide
changes in children ’s grades and rate of academic prod-
uctivity [109]. After all parent, child and teacher data
are collected at pre- and post-, the IEs will complete a
measure of functional impairment [110].Independent evaluator (IE) training and reliability
IEs will be advanced doctoral students in applied psych-ology who have been trained to a reliable standard on theuse of diagnostic instruments by M.K. and J.M. following
recommended guidelines through joint interviews, live
observation, and discussion during the pre-study start-upmeetings. IE reliability will be checked quarterly. Kappa
coefficients will be computed, and a minimum of 0.85 will
be required for each measure.
Interventions
Primary prevention (universal interventions)
The use of SWPBIS in this study differs from other studies
in that it focuses primarily on student mental health ( i.e.,
emotional and behavioral functioning). The focus ofprimary prevention strategies will be to prevent new cases
of mild externalizing or anxiety problem behaviors by
using school-wide (universal) st rategies. A key intervention
will be the development of a leadership team. The primary
responsibility of the leadership team will be to develop,
implement and formatively evaluate Tier 1 interventions.In the process, a set of school-wide expectations will be
developed, explicitly taught to all students and promoted
through the implementation of a school-wide motivationsystem. Specific rules and positive and negative conse-
quences for student behavior in hallways, cafeteria, and
playgrounds will be developed, taught to students, andimplemented and monitored by school personnel. We
expect that Tier 1 interventions will lead to improved
school climate and perceived school safety. Improvedschool climate and perceived school safety will likely
contribute to a decrease in the number of children who
develop externalizing behavior problems, and also, anxietyproblems. We will have two tiers in the proposed study:
Tier 1 for universal interventions and Tier 2 for children
who meet diagnostic criteria or are at risk for an externaliz-ing or an anxiety disorder.
Secondary prevention (at-risk/high risk students)
The Coping Power Program (CPP) is a cognitive-behavioral,
multi-component group intervention for elementary and
middle school students at risk for externalizing behaviordisorders. In addition to anger management, the CPP
includes units on goal setting, emotional awareness, relax-
ation training, social skills training, problem solving, andhandling peer pressure. The original CPP offers eight ses-
sions for the first year of intervention and 25 sessions for
the second year of intervention. We adapted the protocolbased on qualitative (focus groups) and quantitative (ac-
ceptability) data from parents, children and teachers. We
reduced CPP from the original 34-session program to a14-session format to make it possible for counselors in
busy under-resourced urban schools to run groups with
CPP. Care was taken to maintain the key componentsEiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 7 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
(active ingredients) of the treatment, even though less time
was dedicated to covering each Section. A previous shorter
version of CPP (Anger Coping Program) has been found tobe very effective with a group of aggressive boys [58,111].
Friends for Life (FRIENDS) is a group CBT intervention,
based on a theoretical model, which addresses cognitive,physiological and behavioral processes that are seen to
interact in the development and perpetuation of excessive
anxiety. The original FRIENDS protocol consists of 10(60-minute) weekly sessions and two booster sessions.
In the present study, we have included the booster sessions
in the regular protocol and added two more sessions inorder to fit them into the typical class period (40 minutes),
for a total of 14 sessions. The protocol has a parent com-
ponent, which consists of two group sessions that focuson strategies to help parents cope with their own anxiety,
reinforcement strategies and contingency management
for children, and brief training in problem solving andcommunication skills.
Data analytic plan
The statistical analyses for each of the study aims are
described below: in addressing aim one, mean fidelity
and its 95% confidence intervals for Tier 1 will be calcu-lated using 20 randomly selected participants from each of
the six schools during years three, four, and five (120 total
per year). The 95% confidence intervals will be presentedby C & C + C for all schools combined and for each
school. Content and process fidelity data for Tier 2 will be
obtained by scoring 14 video recorded sessions per eachof the treatment groups. Perception of School Climate
(aim two) during year one will be surveyed by a randomly
selected sample of teachers, support staff and adminis-trators from each participant school. The randomly
selected sample will consist of similar proportion of teachers,
support staff and administrators within each school. Thequestionnaire [101] will be completed at the end of years
one, two, three, four, and five. This 31-item, 5-point Likert
type scale checklist has four factors. Each factor ’st o t a l
score will be analyzed separately. School personnel no
longer present in the school during subsequent years
will be replaced.
The general analytical approach for testing our hypoth-
eses will be the Laird and Ware mixed effects model [112]
and the Generalized Estimating Equation (GEE) approaches[113,114]. Mixed effects and GEE are statistical approaches
based on regression techniques for analyzing correlated
data collected repeatedly from the same subject. The studydesign will allow us to examine the between- subjects effect
related to the two levels of support, and a within-subjects
effect corresponding to time points (five time points), aswell as a type of support (C, C + C) by time interaction
effect. These analyses will be conducted using SAS Proc
Mixed, which utilizes the mixed effects models, and SASProc Genmod, which utilizes GEE [115]. Both the mixed
effects model and GEE approaches allow estimation of
fixed effect parameters such as time, and time by treat-ment interaction. If the interaction term is significant, it
indicates that change in school climate and/or reduction
in ODRs over time is significantly different between thetwo levels of support. If the interaction term is statistically
not significant, the changes over time for the two primary
outcomes will be presented by the time effect only, whichrepresents both levels of support. The advantage of utilizing
these methods is that all information available from each
student is used, including variables with missing observa-tions. In the proposed analyses, we will consider students
measured within classes are correlated and will be nested
within classes. Nested analysis will be chosen as partof Proc Mixed and Proc GEE, as such, the intraclass
‘intracluster ’correlation (ICC) will be part of the overall
variance covariance matrix.
Changes from pre- to post- implementation in diagnostic
status, symptom severity and impairment level, coping skills
and academic productivity dur ing Implementation across
all schools, regardless of lev el of support, will be analyzed
using McNemar tests. For each of the listed primary
outcomes, a series of 2X2 tables will be constructed totest changes from pre- to post- in the pertinent categories
using McNemar tests. Alpha level will be adjusted to
0.025 based on Bonferroni criteria for multiple compari-sons. We will also use McNemar tests to test the hypothesis
that the pre- to post- level of improvement in diagnostic
status, symptom severity, impairment level, coping, andacademic productivity obtained during Implementation
will be maintained during Sustainability among schools
receiving C + C.
We would like to determine whether pre- to post- im-
provement in diagnostic status, symptom severity, impair-
ment level, and academic productivity differ by supportcondition during the implementation phase. In addressing
this research question, and for the sake of simplifying
the statistical analysis, each student will be categorizedas either improved or not improved based on change
from pre- to post-. A category one will be assigned if a
student ’s diagnostic status, for example, changes either
from positive to intermediate, intermediate to negative,
or positive to negative. Otherwise a score of zero will beassigned. Similar coding will be used for symptom severity,
coping, impairment level, and academic productivity. We
will use chi-squared tests to compare the proportion of(yes/no) for each of the primary outcomes between C and
C + C type of supports. To examine changes in the rate of
ODRs between baseline and follow up during each schoolyear, the number of students with at least one ODR will
be defined at baseline and at the follow up and a 95%
confidence interval for such changes will be constructedfor each of the five years.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 8 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
In addressing aim three, school climate scores and the
proportion of out-of school suspensions (number of
suspension divided by number of students) served at theschool during the previous academic year ( i.e.,b e f o r e
implementation of Tier 1) will be compared to school
climate scores (using the two independent sample t-test),and school suspensions for each subsequent project year
(using Chi-squared test) respectively. For Tier 2, the
proportion of children at baseline who are found to haveunmet need for mental health services ( e.g., children found
to have an externalizing or anxiety disorder at the inter-
mediate or clinical level via the DISC-IV and who havenot received mental health services as measured via the
SACA) will be compared to the proportion of children
with unmet need for mental health services in subsequentyears (using Chi-squared test). In order to obtain a meas-
ure of unmet need at baseline, we will interview parents to
assess the presence of disorders and service utilization ato n ey e a rp r i o rt ot h ea s s e s s m e n ta n da tt h et i m eo ft h e
assessment. For each subsequent cohort of children, we
will interview parents about presence of disorder andservice utilization only at the time of the assessment.
Comparison of the proportion of unmet need between
each subsequent year to the baseline proportion will becompared using Chi-square test.
Aim four: cost analysis
We will evaluate the effectiveness of SWPBIS with C + C
as compared to SWPBIS with C in increasing procedural
and process fidelity and in reducing ODRs and improvingschool climate, and children ’s grades, diagnostic status,
symptom severity and impairment; and the effectiveness
of SWPBIS with C + C as compared to SWPBIS with C.An incremental cost-effectiveness ratio [116] will be con-
structed for each intervention (SWPBS with C + C for Tier
1, SWPBS with C for Tier 1, SWPBS with C + C for Tier2, SWPBS with C for Tier 2). The denominator of the
cost-effectiveness ratio is the difference between the effect-
iveness of the intervention and control groups (accountingfor baseline levels) on designated measures of fidelity and
student outcomes ( e.g., student grades). The numerator of
the cost ratios is the difference in mean costs for interven-tion and control groups (accounting for baseline levels).
All costs associated with the program will be set at $0
at baseline. Costs for interventions will include: initialdevelopment of the leadership team; initial training of
the coaches (Tier 1) and clinical supervisors (Tier 2);
initial training of the leadership team and school coun-selors; subsequent supervision of coaches and clinical
supervisors; conducting groups with at risk children; and
activities to maintain the SWPBIS program, includingday-to-day implementation, o ngoing training, data col-
lection, and money for student incentives. Within each
component, two main types of costs will be calculated:cost of physical materials used for training and interven-
tions and costs associated with time spent by trainers and
school personnel [117].
As an example, the cost-effectiveness ratio for fidelity
will reveal how much it costs (or how much it saves) to in-
crease fidelity among the study population by one point.Confidence intervals will be constructed to determine the
probability that the difference between two ratios indicates
significant differences in cost-effectiveness for the targetpopulation. The ratios can then be ordered from lowest
to highest to show which intervention is the most cost-
effective for increasing the SET score. Administratorsthen have the information they need to determine if gains
in fidelity are sufficient to justify marginal costs. In a similar
manner cost-effectiveness ratios can be constructed forother targeted outcomes ( e.g., measures of school climate,
child symptomatology, impair ment, coping skills, symptom
severity, and functioning) for comparisons in which the re-sults indicate significant im provement in the intervention
group as compared to the control condition.
Examination of focus group results
As indicated, focus groups will be conducted with LTs to
identify their perceptions of SWPBIS implementation intheir schools. Sessions will be transcribed and analyzed
qualitatively, based on grounded theory. Two RAs will
read the transcripts independently and record all majorthemes on index cards. The RAs will present the data
to the research team. The research team will then try
to resolve any discrepancies between the RAs ’findings.
Next, the RAs will examine the transcripts once again
and identify the frequency of comments pertaining to
each theme. The frequencies for RA one and RA twowill be compared to check for inter-rater agreement.
Standard frequency tables will be used to compare the
relative frequency of endorsements for each theme. Theagreement between the two RAs will also be checked by
calculating the Kappa co-efficient.
Sample size justification and statistical power
Sample size estimation was based on addressing the
primary outcome, the participants ’diagnostic status (aim
two). The statistical analysis will be McNemar tests for
two correlated proportions (pre/post) between two groups.
With a sample size of 300 students, the statistical testachieves 92% power to detect an odds ratio of three using
a two-sided McNemar test with a significance level ( α)o f
0.01. The odds ratio is equivalent to a difference betweentwo paired proportions of 0.25, which occurs, for example,
when the proportion among students diagnosed with a
Positive anxiety/externalizin gd i s o r d e ra tp r ea n di m p r o v e d
to Intermediate at post (cell 1,2 in the 2X2 McNemar
table) is 0.425 and the proportion among students diag-
nosed without Positive anxiety/externalizing disorder whoEiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 9 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
became either Intermediate or Positive at post (cell 2,1 in
the 2X2 McNemar table) is 0.175. Therefore, the propor-
tion of discordant pairs is 0.60. We adjusted αlevel to
0.01 to account for the multiple 2X2 McNemar testing.
We need to recruit six schools, grades four to eight,to be
able to enroll 300 evaluable students who meet inclusioncriteria. We assumed that the observed changes in stu-
dents ’diagnostic status within schools are independent
based on an evaluation of the FRIENDS program, inwhich ‘schools ’level accounted for less than 5% of the
total variance across dependent measures.
Discussion
Innovation
The study is innovative in a number of ways. This is the
first study utilizing SWPBIS as a foundation for addressing
mental health disparities i n urban schools and one of
the first studies embedding EBIs for both externalizing
and anxiety disorders within a SWPBIS framework. With
regard to implementation science, this is the first study
assessing the effectiveness of two randomized levels of sup-port for school personnel implementing EBIs. The study
uses rigorous methods for the measurement of intervention
content and process fidelity w ithin a two-tier mental health
program. We will also conduct a cost analysis and measure
the effects of Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions on academic
productivity, grades, attendance, disciplinary referrals, andsuspensions, which are rarely assessed in this type of
dissemination and implementation study [12].
Challenges and limitations
Implementing SWPBIS with mental health supports in
under-resourced urban schools presents a number of chal-lenges. In our pilot study where we developed and piloted
the interventions, we faced repeated leadership changes at
the district level, staff turnover at the school level, andlimited parent participation [74]. However, we also found
strong and consistent support among second-level adminis-
trators ( e.g., regional superintenden ts) at the District level
and committed leadership teams that were able to recruit
new members who functioned effectively. With the lessons
learned from our pilot study, we are able to more effectivelysupport the schools in successfully implementing SWPBIS
while receiving either level of support. We have redoubled
our efforts at helping schools to increase parental collabor-ation and support, which lead to more parent participation.
We have also designed the implementation strategy to fully
utilize existing policy and infrastructure ( e.g., implementa-
tion of District-wide practices to promote students ’success;
utilizing school counselors and school facilities for Tier 2
interventions) to limit strain on resources so that theproposed program will be sustainable.
A limitation is that we are conducting the study in six
schools within a single school district (though it is one ofthe largest and most diverse school districts in the country),
which limits generalizability to schools in different parts of
the country. Including a relatively small number of schoolslimits our ability to examine the clustering effect of school
classes and schools. In this study, the unit of randomization
is the school but the unit of analysis (aim two) is thestudent. A cluster randomized approach would have been
an appropriate design if a much larger number of schools
were included in the study. However, it is anticipatedthat the degree of similarity in treatment response among
students within a class will be poorly correlated, and
therefore the intraclass correlation coefficient withinclusters will be small and its effect on the overall variance
between schools would be minimal. However, an appropri-
ate cluster analyses will be cond ucted using nested analysis.
The NESTED Procedure of SAS [115] is an example of
such analysis. We expect that our findings will inform
implementation research in schools and procedures tobe incorporated into larger-scale trials in urban schools
in the future.
Conclusions
This study has the potential to show the amount ofresources (training and con sultation) needed for the
implementation of EBIs with high levels of fidelity inunder-resourced urban schools. It will also begin to
show the type of resources needed in order to sustain
this type of program longer term. The cost and cost-effectiveness analyses will enable urban school districts
and policy makers to determine costs to successfully
deploy SWPBIS with integrat ed mental health supports
in each additional school and throughout the district
and how much additional support and cost would be
needed in order to improve implementation fidelity,and school and child outcomes.
Trial status
ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: NCT01941069. The study wasapproved by the Committee for the Protection of HumanSubjects of The Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia and
the Devereux Foundation (IRB 12 –009477) and by the
Office of Research and Evaluation (ORE) Research ReviewCommittee of the School District of Philadelphia (IRB
2012-07-099).
Abbreviations
ABA: Applied behavior analysis; CBT: Cognitive behavioral therapy; CD: Conduct
disorder; C: Consultation; C + C: Consultation plus coaching; CPP: Coping powerprogram; EBI: Evidence-based intervention; FRIENDS: Friends for life;GAD: Generalized anxiety disorder; ODD: Oppositional defiant disorder;
SAD: Separation anxiety disorder; SP: Social phobia; SWPBIS: School-wide
positive behavioral interventions and supports.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 10 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
Authors ’contributions
RE conceived the study, drafted the manuscript and approved all edits. BMC,
MK, and TP collaborated on the design of Tier 1 and Tier 2 interventions. AJprepared all quantitative analyses. ZC prepared the cost analyses. JM servesas project director. JC serves as project coordinator and IRB regulatory. GS is
a consultant on this project. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.
The final version of the manuscript was vetted and approved by all authors.
Funding
The study is being funded by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
Child Health and Human Development (NICHD), 1R01HD073430-01A1 toEiraldi, R. (PI).
Author details
1Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences,
The Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3440 Market St, Philadelphia, PA
19104-3306, USA.2Division of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, The
Children ’s Hospital of Philadelphia, 3550 Market St, Philadelphia, PA
19104-3303, USA.3Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 3401 Civic Center Blvd, Philadelphia, PA
19104-4319, USA.4Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, 3535 Market St, Philadelphia, PA 19104-3371, USA.
5Devereux Center for Effective Schools, The Devereux Foundation, 2012
Renaissance Blvd, King of Prussia, PA 19406, USA.6Center for Behavioral
Education and Research, Department of Educational Psychology, University
of Connecticut, 249 Glenbroook Road Unit 2064, Storrs, CT 06269-2064, USA.
Received: 3 August 2013 Accepted: 3 January 2014
Published: 15 January 2014
References
1. Goodman SH, et al:Representativeness of clinical samples of youths with
mental disorders: a preliminary population-based study. J Abnorm Psychol
1997, 106(1):3 –14.
2. Burns BJ, et al:Children ’s mental health service use across service sectors.
Health Aff (Millwood) 1995, 14(3):147 –59.
3. Kataoka SH, Zhang L, Wells KB: Unmet need for mental health care
among U.S. children: Variation by ethnicity and insurance status.Am J Psychiatry 2002, 159:1548 –1555.
4. Pumariega AJ, Rogers K, Rothe E: Culturally competent systems of care for
children ’s mental health: advances and challenges. Community Ment
Health J 2005, 41(5):539 –55.
5. Eiraldi RB, et al:Service Utilization among ethnic minority children with
ADHD: a model of help-seeking behavior. Adm Policy Ment Health 2006,
33(5):607 –22.
6. Verhulst FC, van der Ende J: Factors associated with child mental health
service use in the community. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1997,
36(7):901 –9.
7. Woodward AM, Dwinell AD, Arons BS: Barriers to mental health care for
Hispanic Americans: A literature review and discussion. J Ment Health
Adm 1992, 19:224 –236.
8. Owens PL, et al:Barriers to children ’s mental health services. J Am Acad
Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2002, 41(6):731 –8.
9. Flisher AJ, et al:Correlates of unmet need for mental health services by
children and adolescents. Psychol Med 1997, 27(5):1145 –54.
10. Eiraldi R, Mazzuca LB: Factors affecting utilization of mental health
services by low-income Latino children: A model of parental help-seeking
behavior
.I nChild Poverty in America Today: Health and Medical Care. Edited
by Maume AADJ. Westport, CT: Praeger; 2007:74 –92.
11. Sink CA, Igelman CN: Anxiety disorders .I nEducator ’s Guide to Mental Health
Issues in the Classroom. Edited by Kline FM, Silver LB. Baltimore, MD: Paul H.
Brookes; 2004.
12. Rones M, Hoagwood K: School-based mental health services: a research
review. Clin Child Fam Psychol Rev 2000, 3(4):223 –41.
13. Taras HL: School-based mental health services. Pediatrics 2004,
113(6):1839 –45.
14. McKay MM, McCadam K, Gonzales J: Addressing barriers to mental health
services for inner-city children and their caretaker. Community Ment
Health J 1996, 32(4):353 –361.
15. Nabors LA, Reynolds MW: Overcoming challenges in outcome evaluations
of school mental health programs. J Sch Health 2000, 70:206 –209.16. Weist MD: Challenges and opportunities in expanded school mental
health. Clin Psychol Rev 1999, 19:131 –135.
17. Greenberg MT, Domitrovich C, Bumbarger B: The prevention of mental
disorders in school-aged children: Current state of the field. Preventionand Treatment. Prev & Treat 2001, 4:1.
18. Hintze JM: Interventions for Fears and Anxiety Problems .I nInterventions
for Academic and Behavior Problems II: Preventive and Remedial Approaches.Edited by Shinn MR, Walker HM, Stoner G. Bethesda, MD: NASP Publications;
2002:939 –959.
19. Cappella E, et al:Enhancing schools ’capacity to support children in
poverty: an ecological model of school-based mental health services.
Adm Policy Ment Health 2008, 35(5):395 –409.
20. Atkins MS, et al:School-based mental health services for children living in
high poverty urban communities. Adm Policy Ment Health 2006,
33(2):146 –59.
21. Nock MK, et al
:Lifetime prevalence, correlates, and persistence of
oppositional defiant disorder: results from the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. J Child Psychol Psychiatry 2007, 48(7):703 –13.
22. Nock MK, et al:Prevalence, subtypes, and correlates of DSM-IV conduct
disorder in the National Comorbidity Survey Replication. Psychol Med
2006, 36(5):699 –710.
23. Yoshikawa H, Knitzer J: Lessons from the field: Head Start mental health
strategies to meet changing needs. New York: National Center for Children in
Poverty; 1997.
24. Reid J: Prevention of conduct disorder before and after school entry:
Relating interventions to developmental findings. Dev Psychopathol 1993,
5:243 –262.
25. Furlong MJ, Morrison GM, Jimerson SR: Externalizing behaviors of
aggression and violence and the school context .I nHandbook of research
in emotional and behavioral disorders. Edited by Rutherford RB Jr, Quinn MM,
Mathur SR. dew York: Guilford; 2007:243 –261.
26. Ma L, et al:Academic competence for adolescents who bully and who
are bullied: Findings from the 4-H study of positive youth development.
J Early Adolesc 2009, 29:862 –897.
27. Frick PJ: Conduct disorders and severe antisocial behavior. New York:
Plenum; 1998.
28. Miller-Johnson S, et al:Relationship between childhood peer rejection
and aggression and adolescent delinquency severity and type amongAfrican American youth. J Emotional and Behav Disord 1999, 7:137 –146.
29. Moffitt TE, Caspi A: Childhool predictors differentiate life-course persistent
and adolescence-limited pathways among males and females.Dev Psychopathol 2001, 13:355 –375.
30. Patterson GR, Yoeger K: Developmental models for delinquent behavior .
InMental disorder and crime. Edited by Hodgins S. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage; 1993.
31. Canino G, et al:The DSM-IV rates of child and adolescent disorders in
Puerto Rico: prevalence, correlates, service use, and the effects ofimpairment. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2004, 61(1):85 –93.
32. Costello EJ, et al:Prevalence and development of psychiatric disorders in
childhood and adolescence. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2003, 60(8):837 –44.
33. Greco L, Morris T: Factors influencing the link between social anxiety and
peer acceptance: Contributions of social skills and close friendships
during middle childhood. Behav Ther 2005, 36:197 –205.
34. Strauss CC, et al:The association between social withdrawal and
internalizing problems of children. J Abnorm Child Psychol 1986,
14(4):525 –35.
35. Van Amerigen M, Manicini C, Farvolden P: The impact of anxiety disorders
on educational achievement. J Anxiety Disord 2003, 17:561 –571.
36. Kearney CA, Bensaheb A: Assessing Anxiety Disorders in Children and
Adolescents .I nThe clinical assessment of children and adolescents: a
practitioner ’s handbook. Edited by Smith S, Handler L. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates Publishers; 2007:467 –483.
37. Kearney CA, Albano AM: The functional profiles of school refusal behavior
diagnostic aspects. Behav Modif 2004, 28(1):147 –61.
38. Beidel DC: Social phobia and overanxious disorder in school-age
children. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1991, 30(4):545 –52.
39. Feehan M, McGee R, Williams SM: Mental health disorders from age 15 to
age 18 years. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 1993, 32(6):1118 –26.
40. Bell-Dolan D, Brazeal TJ: Separation anxiety disorder, overanxious
disorder, and school refusal. Child Adolesc Psychiatr Clin N Am 1993,
2:563 –580.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 11 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
41. Pine DS, Grun J: In Anxiety disorders , Child psychopharmacology, Volume 17.
Edited by Walsh TB. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric Press; 1998.
42. Gould RA, et al:Cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatment for
social phobia: A meta-analysis. Clin Psychol: Sci Pract 1997, 4:291 –306.
43. Gould RA, et al:Cognitive-behavioral and pharmacological treatment of
generalized anxiety disorder: A preliminary meta-analysis. Behav Ther
1997, 28:285 –305.
44. Pina AA, Silverman WK: Clinical phenomenology, somatic symptoms, and
distress in Hispanic/Latino and European American youths with anxiety
disorders. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol 2004, 33(2):227 –36.
45. Costello EJ, et al:The Great Smoky Mountains Study of Youth. Goals,
design, methods, and the prevalence of DSM-III-R disorders. Arch Gen
Psychiatry 1996, 53(12):1129 –36.
46. Angold A, et al:Psychiatric disorder, impairment, and service use in rural
African American and white youth. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2002,
59(10):893 –901.
47. Fitzpatrick KM, Boldizar JP: The prevalence and consequences of exposure
to violence among African-American youth. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 1993, 32(2):424 –30.
48. Barrett SB, Bradshaw CP, Lewis-Palmer T: Maryland statewide PBIS
initiative: systems, evaluation, and next steps. J Posit Behav Interv 2008,
10(2):105 –114.
49. Lewis TJ, Sugai G: Effective behavior support: a systems approach to
proactive schoolwide management. Focus on Except Child 1999, 31(6):1.
50. Horner RH, et al:A randomized, wait-list controlled effectiveness trial
assessing school-wide positive behavior support in elementary schools.
J Posit Behav Interv 2009, 11(3):133 –144.
51. Bradshaw CP, et al:Altering school climate through school-wide Positive
Behavioral Interventions and Supports: findings from a group-randomized
effectiveness trial. Prev Sci 2009, 10(2):100 –15.
52. Bradshaw CP, Waasdorp TE, Leaf PJ: Effects of school-wide positive behavioral
interventions and supports on child behavior problems. Pediatrics 2012,
130(5):e1136 –45.
53. Bradshaw CP, Mitchell MM, Leaf PJ: Examining the effects of schoolwide
positive behavioral interventions and supports on student outcomes.
J Posit Behav Interv 2010, 12(3):133 –148.
54. Waasdorp TE, Bradshaw CP, Leaf PJ: The impact of schoolwide positive
behavioral interventions and supports on bullying and peer rejection: arandomized controlled effectiveness trial. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2012,
166(2):149 –56.
55. Lochman J, Wells K, Lenhart L: Coping Power Child Group Program: Facilitator
Guide. New York: Oxford University Press; 2008.
56. Lochman JE, Wells KC: The coping power program for preadolescent
aggressive boys and their parents: outcome effects at the 1-year follow-up.J Consult Clin Psychol 2004, 72(4):571 –8.
57. Lochman JE: Effects of different treatment lengths in cognitive
behavioral interventions with aggressive boys. Child Psychiatry Hum Dev
1985, 16:45–56.
58. Lochman J, Curry J: Effects of social problem solving training and
self-instruction training with aggressive boys. J Clin Child Psychol 1986,
15:159 –164.
59. Barrett P: Friends for Life: Group leaders ’manual for children. Sydney, Australia:
Pathways Health and Research Centre, Australia; 2008.
60. Briesch AM, Hagermoser Sanetti LM, Briesch JM: Reducing the prevalence
of anxiety in children and adolescents: an evaluation of the evidence
base for the FRIENDS for life program. Sch Ment Health 2010, 2:155 –165.
61. Pahl KM, Barrett PM: Interventions for anxiety disorders in children using
group cognitive-behavioral therapy with family involvement .I n
Evidence-Based Psychotherapies for Children and Adolescents. Edited by Weisz
JR, Kazdin AE. New York: The Guilford Press; 2010:61 –79.
62. Barrett P, et al:Cognitive-behavioral treatment of anxiety disorders in
children: long-term (6-year) follow-up. J Consult Clin Psychol 2001,
69(1):135 –41.
63. Shortt AL, Barrett PM, Fox TL:
Evaluating the FRIENDS program: A
cognitive-behavioral group treatment for anxious children and theirparents. J Clin Child Psychol 2001, 30(4):525 –35.
64. Sugai G, Horner RH, Gresham F: Behaviorally effective school
environments .I nInterventions for academic and behavior problems 2:
Preventative and remedial approaches. Edited by Shinn MR, Walker HM,
Stoner G. Bethesda, MD: National Association of School Psychologists;2002:315 –350.65. Ginsburg GS, Drake KL: School-based treatment for anxious african-american
adolescents: a controlled pilot study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2002,
41(7):768 –75.
66. Ginsburg GS, et al:Transporting CBT for childhood anxiety disorders into
inner-city schools-based mental health clinics. Cogn Behav Pract 2008,
15:148 –158.
67. Stein BD, et al:A mental health intervent ion for schoolchildren
exposed to violence: a randomized controlled trial. Jama 2003,
290(5):603 –11.
68. Lochman JE, et al:Dissemination of the Coping Power program:
importance of intensity of counselor training. J Consult Clin Psychol 2009,
77(3):397 –409.
69. Warren J, et al:Urban applications of the school-wide positive behavior
support: Critical issues and lessons learned. J Posit Behav Interv 2003,
5(2):80 –91.
70. Scott TM: A schoolwide example of positive behavioral support. J Posit
Behav Interv 2001, 3(2):88 –94.
71. Kutash K, Duchnowski AJ, Lynn N: School-based mental health: An
empirical guide for decision-makers. Tampa, FL: Unive rsity of South
Florida, The Louis de la Parte Florida Mental Health Institute,
Department of Child & Family Studies, Research and Training Centerfor Children ’s Mental Health; 2006.
72. Strein W, Hoagwood K, Cohn A: School psychology: A public health
perspective I. Prevention, populations, and systems change. J Sch Psychol
2003, 41:23–38.
73. Weist MD: Fulfilling the promise of school-based mental health: moving
toward a Public Mental Health Promotion approach. J Abnorm Child
Psychol 2005, 33(6):735 –41.
74. Proctor EK, et al:Implementation research in mental health services: an
emerging science with conceptual, methodological, and training
challenges. Adm Policy Ment Health 2009, 36(1):24 –34.
75. Proctor EK, et al:Outcomes for implementation research: Conceptual
distinctions, measurement challenges, and research agenda. Adm Policy
Ment Health 2011, 38:65–76.
76. Elashoff JD: nQuery advisor® 6.0. Sangus, MA: Statistical Solutions; 1995-2005.
77. Goodman R, et al:Using the Strengths and Difficulties Questionnaire
(SDQ) to screen for child psychiatric disorders in a community sample.Br J Psychiatry 2000, 177:534 –539.
78. Shaffer D, et al:NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children Version
IV (NIMH DISC-IV): description, differences from previous versions, and
reliability of some common diagnoses. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry
2000, 39(1):28 –38.
79. Guy W: Clinical Global Impression scale(CGI), in ECDEU Assessment Manual for
Psychopharmacology Revised. Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare; 1976:217 –222.
80. Walker HM, Severson HH: Systematic Screening for Behavior Disorders (SSBD).
Secondth edition. Longmont, CO: Sopris West; 1992.
81. Irvin LK, et al:Validity of office discipline referral measures as indices of
school-wide behavioral status and effects of school-wide behavioral in-terventions. J Posit Behav Interv 2004, 6:131 –147.
82. Food Research and Action Center: Food Hardship in America - 2010 Data for
the Nation, States, 100 MSAs, and Every Congressional District. Washington,
DC: Food Research and Action Center; 2010. http://frac.org/new-data-reveal-extent-of-hunger-in-every-corner-of-the-us/.
83. Martin JL, et al:Moving evidence-based practices into everyday clinical
care settings: Addressing challenges associated with pathways to
treatment, child characteristics, and structure of treatment. Emotional
Behav Disord in Youth 2007, 7:5–21.
84. Beidas RS, Kendall PC: Training therapists in evidence-based practice: a
critical review of studies from a systems-contextual perspective.Clin Psychol (New York) 2010, 17
(1):1 –30.
85. Sugai G, et al:School-wide Positive Behavior Support Team Training Manual.
University of Oregon: College of Education; 2005.
86. Sugai G, et al:School-wide Positive Behavior Support Team Training Manual.
Eugene, OR: University of Oregon College of Education; 2005.
87. Horner RH, et al:I nSchoolwide positive behavior support, in Individualized
supports for students with problem behaviors: Designing positive behavior
plans. Edited by Bambara LM, Kern L. New York: Guilford; 2005:359 –390.
88. Stumpf RE, Higa-McMillan CK, Chorpita BF: Implementation of evidence-based
services for youth: assessing provider knowledge. Behav Modif 2009,
33(1):48 –65.Eiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 12 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
89. Goodman R, Scott S: Comparing the strengths and difficulties
questionnaire and the child behavior checklist: Is small beautiful?
J Abnorm Child Psychol 1999, 27(1):17 –24.
90. Goodman R: Psychometric properties of the strengths and difficulties
questionnaire. J Am Acad Child Adolesc Psychiatry 2001, 40(11):1337 –45.
91. Elliot D, Mihalic S: Issues in disseminating and replicating effective
prevention programs. Prev Sci 2004, 5:47–53.
92. Forgatch MS, Patterson GR, DeGarmo DS: Evaluating fidelity: predictive
validity for a measure of competent adherence to the Oregon model of
parent management training. Behav Ther 2005, 36(1):3 –13.
93. Cloitre M, et al:Therapeutic alliance, negative mood regulation, and
treatment outcome in child abuse-related posttraumatic stress disorder.
J Consult Clin Psychol 2004, 72(3):411 –6.
94. Hogue A, et al:Early therapeutic alliance and treatment outcome in
individual and family therapy for adolescent behavior problems.
J Consult Clin Psychol 2006, 74(1):121 –9.
95. Huey SJ Jr, et al:Multisystemic therapy effects on attempted suicide by
youths presenting psychiatric emergencies. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 2004, 43(2):183 –90.
96. Horner RH, et al:The School-Wide Evaluation Tool (SET): A research
instrument for assessing school-wide positive behavior support. J Posit
Behav Interv 2004, 6:3–12.
97. Scott T, Barrett S: Using staff and student time engaged in disciplinary
procedures to evaluate the impact of school-wide PBS. J Posit Behav
Interv 2004, 6:21–27.
98. Ervin RA, et al:Merging research and practice agendas to address
reading and behavior school-wide. Sch Psychol Rev 2006, 35(2):198 –223.
99. McCausland SG, Hales LW, Reinhardtsen JM: CREST: Technical Report.
Vancouver, WA: Educational Service District 112; 1997.
100. Horwitz SM, et al:Reliability of the services assessment for children and
adolescents. Psychiatr Serv 2001, 52(8):1088 –94.
101. Canino G, et al:Methodological challenges in assessing children ’s mental
health services utilization. Ment Health Serv Res 2002, 4(2):97 –107.
102. Shaffer D, et al:The NIMH Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children
Version 2.3 (DISC-2.3): description, acceptability, prevalence rates, and
performance in the MECA Study. Methods for the Epidemiology of Child
and Adolescent Mental Disorders Study. J Am Acad Child Adolesc
Psychiatry 1996, 35(7):865 –77.
103. Causey D, Dubow E: Development of self-report coping measure for
elementary school children. J Clin Child Psychol 1992, 21(1):47 –59.
104. Achenbach T, Rescorla L: Manual for the ASEBA School-Age Forms & Profiles:
An Integrated System of Multi-informant Assessment. Burlington, VT: University
of Vermont, Research Center for Children Youth & Families; 2001.
105. March JS: Manual for the Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for Children-2nd
Edition (MASC 2). North Tonawanda, NY: MHS; 2012.
106. Kovacs M: CDI 2: Children ’s Depression Inventory 2nd Edition. North
Tonawanda, NY: Multi-Health Systems, Inc.; 2011.
107. DuPaul GJ, Rapport M, Perriello L: Teacher ratings of academic skills: the
development of the academic performance rating scale. Sch Psychol Rev
1991, 20(2):284 –300.
108. Shaffer D, et al:A children ’s global assessment scale (CGAS). Arch Gen
Psychiatry 1983, 40(11):1228 –31.
109. Lochman JE: Cognitive-behavioral intervention with aggressive boys:
three-year follow-up and preventive effects. J Consult Clin Psychol 1992,
60(3):426 –32.
110. Laird NM, Ware JH: Random-effects models for longitudinal data.
Biometrics 1982, 38(4):963 –974.
111. Liang KW, Zeger SL: Longitudinal data analyses using generalized linear
models. Biometrika 1986, 73:13–22.
112. Zeger SL, Liang KY: Longitudinal data analysis for dicrete and continuous
outcomes. Biometrics 1986, 42(1):121 –130.
113. SAS/STAT: SAS/STAT® 9.2 User ’s Guide. Cary, NC: SAS Institute Inc; 2002 –2008.
114. Detsky AS: A clinician ’s guide to cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern
Med 1990, 113(2):147 –154.
115. Blonigen BA, et al:Application of economic analysis to school-wide
positive behavioral support (SWPBS) programs. J Posit Behav Interv 2008,
10(1):5 –19.116. Glasser BG, Strauss AL: The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine; 1967.
117. Barrett PM, et al:Long-term outcomes of an Australian universal
prevention trial of anxiety and depression symptoms in children and
youth: an evaluation of the friends program. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol
2006, 35(3):403 –11.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-9-12
Cite this article as: Eiraldi et al. :A cluster randomized trial to evaluate
external support for the implementation of positive behavioral
interventions and supports by school personnel. Implementation Science
2014 9:12.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitEiraldi et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:12 Page 13 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/12
