Health Psychology
1997, Vol. 16, No. 2, 107-113Copyright 1997 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0278-6I33S7/$3.00
Effects of Decreasing Sedentary Behaviors on Activity
Choice in Obese Children
Leonard H. Epstein, Brian E. Saelens, Michelle D. Myers,
and Dominica Vito
State University of New York at Buffalo
In this study, methods of decreasing highly preferred sedentary behaviors were compared and
the consequent effects on activity choice were examined. Following free choice of sedentary
and physical activities, 34 obese children either were positively reinforced for decreases in
high-preference sedentary activity, were punished for high-preference sedentary activity, had
access to high-preference sedentary activity restricted, or had no contingencies on activity
(control group). Children randomized to reinforcement and punishment were more physically
active on intervention days than the control group. Liking for targeted sedentary activity
decreased in the reinforcement group, but increased in the restriction and control groups.
Results suggest that reinforcing decreases in high-preference sedentary activity can increase
physical activity and decrease liking for targeted sedentary activities.
Key words: activity, sedentary behaviors, behavioral economics, choice, childhood obesity
Increasing physical activity is an important component of
childhood weight-management programs (Epstein, 1992;
Epstein, Coleman, & Myers, 1996). Studies have shown that
obese children are less physically active, perceive physical
activity more negatively (Worsley, Coonan, Leitch, &
Crawford, 1984), and find sedentary activities more reinforc-
ing than physical activities relative to normal weight chil-
dren (Epstein, Smith, Vara, & Rodefer, 1991). The develop-
ment and maintenance of higher physical activity levels for
obese individuals have proven challenging (Dishman, 1990;
Epstein, Koeske, & Wing, 1984; Martin & Dubbert, 1982).
Research has suggested that physical activity can be in-
creased by using standard behavioral strategies such as
self-monitoring, goal setting, and positive reinforcement
(Epstein, Saelens, & O'Brien, 1995; Epstein, Woodall,
Goreczny, Wing, & Robertson, 1984; Keefe & B lumen thai,
1980; Noland, 1989). However, these strategies generally
have been unsuccessful in producing long-term increases in
physical activity (Dishman, 1991), stimulating the need to
explore alternative methods to increase physical activity
over a long-term period.
Behavioral economic theory (Hursch & Bauman, 1987;
Rachlin, 1989) can be used to conceptualize being physi-
cally active as a choice between physically active and
sedentary behaviors. One reason for the low activity levels
Leonard H. Epstein, Brian E. Saelens, Michelle D. Myers, and
Dominica Vito, Department of Psychology, State University of
New York at Buffalo.
This research was supported by National Institutes of Health
Grant HD 25997.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Leonard H. Epstein, Behavioral Medicine Research Laboratory,
Department of Psychology, State University of New York at
Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260. Electronic mail may be sent via
Internet to lhenet@ubvms.cc.buffalo.edu.in obese persons may be that extremely reinforcing seden-
tary behaviors compete with physically active behaviors.
For example, television watching is one prominent seden-
tary behavior that can compete with physical activity. Both
adults' and children's television viewing have been shown to
be negatively correlated with physical activity and fitness
(Durant, Baranowski, Johnson, & Thompson, 1994; Tucker,
1986, 1993; Tucker & Bagwell, 1991) and positively
correlated with obesity (Dietz & Gortmaker, 1985; Gort-
maker, Dietz, & Cheung, 1990; Tucker & Bagwell, 1991).
Decreasing sedentary activities such as television watching
can increase the time and opportunity for physical activity.
The reallocation of even a small portion of time spent in
sedentary behaviors to time spent being physically active
has been shown to have a significant impact on energy
balance and fitness (Blair, 1993; Pate et al., 1995).
Recent studies have shown that reductions in selected
sedentary behaviors are associated with increases in chil-
dren's physical activity (Epstein, Saelens, et al., 1995;
Epstein et al., 1991; Epstein, Valoski, et al., 1995). Children
shifted from preferred sedentary behaviors to physically
active alternatives when access to the sedentary activities
was reduced by increasing the cost of engaging in these
sedentary behaviors (Epstein et al., 1991). Obese children
reinforced for reducing time spent being sedentary or
reinforced for being more physically active similarly in-
creased their amount of time being physically active relative
to a no-contingency control group (Epstein, Saelens, et al.,
1995). In a treatment-outcome study, obese children who
were reinforced for decreases in the time they were seden-
tary had significantly greater reduction in percentage over-
weight at the end of treatment in comparison with children
who were reinforced for increases in physical activity.
Children reinforced for reductions in sedentary time also had
a greater increase in liking of high-intensity physical activi-
107
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
108 EPSTEIN, SAELENS, MYERS, AND VITO
ties than children reinforced for increases in physical
activity (Epstein, Valoski, et al., 1995).
In the studies cited above, the approaches to decreasing
sedentary behaviors were to increase the cost of choosing
sedentary alternatives, or to reinforce children for reductions
in the time they spent on their most preferred sedentary
behaviors. However, other behavior-change techniques may
be used to decrease the time spent engaged in preferred
sedentary behaviors. One alternative method to decrease
high-preference sedentary behaviors is to punish children for
being sedentary. Another approach is to remove the opportu-
nity to be sedentary by eliminating targeted sedentary
activities from the environment (i.e., restriction). Despite the
importance of understanding the influence of basic behav-
ioral processes in modifying activity choice, there is no
previous research contrasting the efficacy of positive rein-
forcement, punishment, and restriction for reduction of
sedentary behaviors. In addition, it is unclear how these
techniques for reducing targeted sedentary activity will
influence reallocation of time for active and nontargeted
sedentary activities.
The goal of the present study was to replicate and extend,
in a controlled laboratory setting, the previous finding that
targeting a reduction in high-preference sedentary activities
results in a partial reallocation of time to physically active
behaviors rather than exclusively to lower preference seden-
tary activities (Epstein, Saelens, et al., 1995). The current
study extends previous research by contrasting the efficacy
of three methods on modifying physical and sedentary
activities and liking of physical and sedentary activities:
positively reinforcing children for being less sedentary,
punishing them for being sedentary by removing positive
reinforcers contingent on being sedentary, or restricting
access to sedentary activities.
Method
Participants
Participants were 8- to 12-year-old obese children of parents
who had applied to the Childhood Weight Control program at the
State University of New York at Buffalo but had not yet been
enrolled in the program. Ninety-three applicant families had
children who met inclusionary criteria for age and obesity status.
Families were contacted by telephone and asked to participate in a
study involving children's choices. Thirty-three White and 4
African American children participated in the study.
Three participants were eliminated from data analysis: 2 partici-
pants were outliers (>2 standard deviations) on physically active
time during the preintervention day, and 1 participant had uncod-
able behavioral data. The final sample consisted of 34 participants,
including 20 girls and 14 boys. Children were paid $50 for their
participation in addition to the reinforcers earned during the study.
This study was approved by the Social Sciences Human Subject
Review Committee at the State University of New York at Buffalo.
Procedure
Children were stratified by gender and randomly assigned to one
of four groups: positively reinforced for not engaging in their two
high-preference sedentary activities (reinforcement; n = 8), pun-ished for engaging in their two high-preference sedentary activities
(punishment; n = 9), access to their two high-preference sedentary
activities eliminated (restriction; n = 8), or a control group that
was reinforced for attendance with no contingencies on activity
(control; n = 9). High-preference sedentary activities were defined
as the two sedentary activities the child engaged in for the most
time during the preintervention day, whereas the low-preference
sedentary activities were the two sedentary activities the child
engaged in for the least time during the preintervention day.
Targeted activities were specified individually for each child, and
children remained in the same assigned group across intervention
days.
The contingencies were arranged such that children in the
reinforcement group earned 1 point for each minute not spent in
high-preference sedentary activities, with a maximal daily point
value of 45 points. Children in the punishment group were given 45
points at the beginning of each session, and lost 1 point for every
minute of high-preference sedentary activity they accumulated.
Children in the restriction and control groups were given 45 points
on each intervention day, regardless of their activity choices. The
reinforcement, punishment, and control groups had access to all
eight of the activities on every day, whereas the restriction group
had access to all eight activities on the adaptation, preintervention,
and postintervention days, but had access only to the four
physically active and two low-preference sedentary activities
during the intervention days.
Children were brought individually into the laboratory for 6
consecutive days. There was 1 adaptation day, followed by 1
preintervention day, 3 intervention days, and 1 postintervention
day. During the adaptation session, parent and child consent were
obtained and children were adapted to the laboratory room,
instructed on how to use the activities, and given 20 min to sample
the activities. The room contained four physical activities and four
sedentary activities. The physical activities included a Tunturi
Executive Ergometer stationary bicycle (Tunturi, Bellevue, WA), a
Precor 718e Low Impact Climber (Precor, Bothell, WA), a Nordic
Track Speed Skating Slide, and a Nordic Track Twist 'N Ski Junior
(Nordic Track, Chaska, MN). The sedentary activities were a
videocassette recorder (VCR) and monitor with current children's
movies, a Super Nintendo Model SNS-001 video game (Nintendo,
Redmond, WA), reading books, and drawing and coloring materi-
als. Children were instructed to engage in only one activity at a
time. After adaptation, children rated their liking of the activities
and child and parent height and weight were assessed.
Preintervention, intervention, and postintervention sessions lasted
45 min. On the preintervention day, children were given free choice
of the activities. On the intervention days, children were provided
with information on how they could earn points dependent on their
group assignment and were shown a point-to-reinforcer menu that
indicated the point values for each reinforcer. Children were told
their current point totals at the beginning and end of each session.
Children in the reinforcement group were instructed that they
would earn one point for each minute that they did not spend doing
high-preference sedentary activities; children in the punishment
group were instructed that they would lose a point for each minute
they spent doing their high-preference sedentary activities. In the
restriction group, the high-preference sedentary activities were
removed prior to the child entering the laboratory room, and
children were instructed that they could engage in the remaining
physically active and low-preference sedentary activities. Children
in all groups were told that it was their choice whether or not to
engage in any available activity. Reinforcers included Buffalo
Bison baseball tickets, bookstore gift certificates, video arcade
tokens, Buffalo Zoo and Science Museum passes, and other
child-related community activities. After the final intervention
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
DECREASING SEDENTARY ACTIVITY 109
session, children chose reinforcers according to the number of
points earned during the 3 intervention days. On the postmterven-
tion day, contingencies were removed and children were given free
choice of all eight activities, similar to the preintervention day.
After completing the postintervention session, children completed
liking ratings for the activities.
Measurements
Child and parent weight were measured on a balance-beam
scale, and height was measured on a stadiometer calibrated to the
nearest 1/8 in. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated by the
formula kg/m2. Percentage overweight was the percentage above
the SOth-percentile BMI for people similar in age and gender
(Must, Dallal, & Diet?.. 1991), and obesity was defined as
percentage overweight greater than 20%.
Children were observed through a one-way mirror during
sessions, and a 30-s time-sampling behavioral coding system was
implemented for each 45-min session to measure the amount of
time children spent engaged in each activity. Twenty-eight percent
of the sessions were observed by two independent observers. The
percentage agreement on interrater reliability for individual ses-
sions was .94 (range = .73-1.00), with reliabilities for individual
physical activities ranging from .S6-.89 and reliabilities for
individual sedentary activities all >.98. Children were engaged in
one of the eight activities for 89% of the observation intervals, with
remaining intervals primarily consisting of children being between
activities. Only intervals in which children were engaged in one of
the eight activities were included in data analysis.
Liking of the activities was measured by using 100-mm visual
analog scales anchored by did not like at all and liked a lot.
Children rated each individual activity, and the average liking of
the four physical activities, two high-preference sedentary activi-
ties, and two low-preference sedentary activities was calculated.
The Four Factor Index of Social Status (Hollingshead, 1975) was
used to determine family socioeconomic status, by means of
assessment of parental educational level and occupational status.
Analytic Plan
One-way analyses of variance (ANOVAs) were conducted to
investigate group differences on child and parent BMI, and on child
age. Three-way mixed ANOVAs were used to explore differences
in time spent in activities and liking of activities. In the activity
analysis, group was the between-subjects variable, and activity
(physical, high-, and low-preference sedentary) and day (preinter-
vention, intervention, postintervention) were the within-subjects
variables. The dependent variable for the activity analyses was the
number of 30-s intervals spent in the physically active, high-
preference sedentary, and low-preference sedentary activities dur-
ing the 45-min session, For the liking analysis, group was the
between-subjects variable, and activity and time (adaptation to
postintervention) were the within-subjects variables. The depen-
dent variable for the liking analysis was the average liking score.
Follow-up two-way ANOVAs were conducted for each type of
activity to explore Group X Day and Group X Time interactions in
the activity and liking analyses, respectively. Planned linear
contrasts were used to explore group differences in activity
between free choice (pre- and postintervention) and intervention
days and change across intervention days. Planned linear contrasts
were further used to explore group differences in activity time on
the pre- and postintervention days and group differences in activity
liking on the adaptation and postintervention days. To explore
relationships between liking of activities and activity choice,Pearson product-moment correlations were calculated between
ratings of liking measured on the adaptation day and time spent
being physically active on the preintervention, postintervention,
and across intervention days. Data analyses were conducted using
the SYSTAT statistical package (Wilkinson, 1992).
Results
Family socioeconomic status ranged from 14 to 66, with a
mean of 43.0 (SD = 12.9), suggesting lower- to upper-
middle-class status for most participating families. There
were 6 single-parent and 31 two-parent families, with an
average of 2.4 (SD - 1.1) children per family. The average
participant was 10.0 (SD = 1.2) years of age and 62%
(SD = 23%) overweight. Mothers were an average of 45%
(SD = 38%) overweight, and fathers were an average of
38% (SD = 28%) overweight. There were no significant
group differences in child or parent BMI or in child age.
Activity
A significant three-way interaction (Group X Day X
Activity) for activity was found, F(24, 240) = 5.74, p <
.001. As shown in Figure 1, the Group X Day interaction
was significant for time spent on the physical activities,
F(\2, 120) = 2.00, p = .03. Linear contrasts revealed that
the reinforcement group, F(l, 30) = 6.53, p = .016, and
punishment group, F(\, 30) = 7.72, p = .009, were
significantly more physically active on the intervention days
than the control group but were not different from each
other. The restriction group was not significantly different in
physically active time from any of the other three groups,
though the restriction group versus the control group con-
trast approached significance, F(\, 30) = 3.90, p = .057.
There was a significant effect of day for time spent being
physically active, F (4, 120) = 16.39, p < .001. Linear
contrasts across days showed a decrease in physical activity
from the first to the second intervention day, F(\, 30) =
4.91, p = .034, but no significant changes from the second to
the third intervention day.
There was a significant Group X Day interaction, F(12,
120) = 9.97, p < .001, for time spent in high-preference
sedentary activities, with the reinforcement, punishment,
and restriction groups engaging in significantly less high-
preference sedentary activity than the control group during
the intervention days. No significant differences were found
among the reinforcement, punishment, or restriction groups,
and there was no significant change in level of high-
preference sedentary activity across intervention days. There
were no significant group differences in the number of points
earned for the reinforcers, with all group means a 130 points
out of a possible 135 points.
The Group X Day interaction for time spent in low-
preference sedentary activities was significant, F(12,120) =
3.26, p < .001, with the reinforcement, punishment, and
restriction groups engaging in more low-preference seden-
tary activity than the control group on the intervention days,
but not differing significantly amongst themselves. There
was a significant increase in low-preference sedentary
activity from the first to second intervention day, F(l, 30) =
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
110 EPSTEIN, SAELENS, MYERS, AND VITO
Active High-preference
O<J
70
60
50
> 40
<5
CO
i 30
CO
20
10
0
-101
(
1
-tA*. "
&IBlllIll
i : ' :.^\ : <
ill:!1i
-
-
,
)
t
X "
r O
A
12345
DaysLow-preference
Sedentary
x Reinforcement
o Punishment
A Restriction
* Control
12345
Days
Figure 1. Time spent in physical activities and high- and low-preference sedentary activities for the
reinforcement, punishment, restriction, and control groups across the preintervention (Day 1),
intervention (Days 2-4), and postintervention (Day 5) days.
6.58, p = .016, but no change from the second to third
intervention day. Across the intervention days, there was no
significant Group X Day interaction for low-preference
sedentary activity.
As shown in Figure 1, there were no significant group
differences in time spent in physical, high-preference seden-
tary, or low-preference sedentary activities on the preinter-
vention and postintervention days. In addition, there were no
significant group differences in the change from preinterven-
tion to postintervention in time spent in the physical,
high-preference sedentary, or low-preference sedentary ac-
tivities.
Liking of Activity
Significant differences were observed in the liking ratings
for the different types of activities measured on the adapta-
tion day, F(2, 90) = 11.06, p < .001. The liking ratings of
both the physical activities (M = 72.0, SD = 3.8) and
high-preference sedentary activities (M = 61 A, SD = 3.8)
were significantly higher than the liking rating of the
low-preference sedentary activities (M = 48.1, SD = 3.8),
but were not significantly different from each other:
F(l,90) = 19.65,p < .001 and F( 1,90) = 12.80,p < .001.
There was no significant main effect of group or Group X
Activity interaction for liking ratings on the adaptation day.
A significant Group X Time X Activity interaction forliking of activities was found from adaptation to postinterven-
tion, F(6, 90) = 2.61, p = .022. As shown in Figure 2, there
was a significant Group X Time interaction for liking of
high-preference sedentary activities, F(3, 30) = 4.31, p =
.012. Linear contrasts showed significant differences over
time in liking of high-preference sedentary activity between
the reinforcement and restriction groups, F(l, 30) = 6.84,
p = .014; the reinforcement and control groups, F(l, 30) =
10.97, p < .002; and the punishment and control groups,
F( 1,30) = 4.20,p = .049. The control and restriction groups
increased their liking of the high-preference sedentary
activities across time, and the reinforcement and punishment
groups respectively decreased and maintained their liking
ratings for high-preference sedentary activity across time.
The Group X Time interactions for liking of physical
activities and low-preference sedentary activities were not
statistically significant, and there were no significant group
differences in liking for the physical or low-preference
sedentary activities on the adaptation or postintervention
day.
Pearson product-moment correlations showed that liking
of high-preference sedentary activity measured on the
adaptation day was significantly inversely related to the
amount of time spent being physically active on the preinter-
vention day, r(34) = —.47, p = .037, (Bonferroni cor-
rected), but was not significantly correlated with total
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
DECREASING SEDENTARY ACTIVITY 111
00
80
70
60
50x Reinforcement
o Punishment
A Restriction
* Control
Adaptation Poettntervsntton
Time
Figure 2. Liking ratings of the high-preference sedentary activities on the adaptation and
postintervention days in the reinforcement, punishment, restriction, and control groups. Liking of
activities was measured with 100-mm visual analog scales anchored by did not like at all and liked a
lot.
physically active time during the intervention days. None of
the other liking ratings assessed on the adaptation day were
significantly correlated with physically active time on the
preintervention, postintervention, or intervention days.
Discussion
The behavioral strategies that reinforced children for
reducing time spent being inactive, or that punished children
for time spent being inactive, were as successful as remov-
ing access to targeted inactive behaviors from the child's
environment in reducing time spent in targeted sedentary
activities. All groups spent the majority of their time
engaged in their high-preference sedentary activities (group
M > 74% of intervals) on the preintervention and postinter-
vention days. Children in the control group maintained their
high level of high-preference sedentary activities across the
intervention days. Children in the intervention groups reallo-
cated time they had spent in high-preference sedentary
behaviors to both physical activity and lower-preference
sedentary behaviors when the experimental contingencies
were in effect. Children who were reinforced for not
engaging in high-preference sedentary activities or penal-
ized for engaging in high-preference sedentary activities
significantly increased their physical activity and their time
spent in low-preference sedentary behaviors. Children who
experienced restriction of high-preference sedentary activi-
ties also increased their time spent in lower-preference
sedentary behaviors, but they did not show an increase in
physical activity that was significantly different from the
control group or the other two intervention groups.
Reinforcement and punishment were more effective than
restriction for increasing children's physical activity. Differ-
ential changes in liking of the targeted sedentary activitiesalso favored using reinforcement or punishment instead of
restriction. This differential change in liking of high-
preference sedentary activities occurred despite similar time
spent in the high-preference sedentary behaviors among the
reinforcement, punishment, and restriction groups. The
mechanism by which the liking changes occurred is unclear,
although possible explanations include group differences in
the perception of choice and affective associations with the
activity (Sidman, 1989). The more the children felt that they
chose not to engage in their high-preference sedentary behavior
(reinforcement and punishment groups) as opposed to being
coerced into not engaging in these targeted behaviors (restriction
group), the less they liked these targeted sedentary behaviors.
Changes in liking of sedentary activities that compete
with physical activity have relevance for activity choice. At
the preintervention day, the less that children liked the
high-preference sedentary activities, the more physically
active they were. Previously, the same significant negative
correlation between liking of high-preference sedentary
activity and physical activity during free choice had been
observed (Epstein, Saelens, et al., 1995). However, it is
prudent not to assume that the reported liking of a behavior
is veridical to behavior or that changes in liking represent
mechanisms for behavior change. For example, children
rated their liking of physically active behaviors as equal to
their liking of preferred sedentary behaviors before contin-
gencies were implemented, but they consistently spent more
time being sedentary than physically active during the pre-
and postintervention sessions. In addition, children rein-
forced for reductions in their sedentary activity returned to
their tow baseline levels of physical activity at the postinter-
vention day, despite a decrease in liking of their high-
preference sedentary activities.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
112 EPSTEIN, SAELENS, MYERS, AND VITO
The differential changes in both physical activity and
ratings of activity liking suggest that either reinforcement or
punishment are more effective methods than restriction for
increasing physical activity. An important difference be-
tween reinforcement and punishment versus restriction is the
access to the targeted high-preference sedentary behavior. In
the restriction condition, access to high-preference sedentary
behaviors was removed, and the reallocation to physical
activity or low-preference sedentary behaviors was the
direct result of the restriction. Participants in the restriction
condition could not perceive that changes in targeted
sedentary activity were related to their choice or under their
control. On the other hand, children in the reinforcement and
punishment groups had the opportunity of engaging in
high-preference sedentary activities but chose instead to
engage in both physical activities and low-preference seden-
tary activities. The behavioral changes in these children
were likely to be more a function of the contingencies, not of
access to the behaviors.
The coercive nature of restriction may have reduced the
attribution that participants engaged in the behavior because
it was their choice. Research has shown higher levels of
physical activity (Martin et al., 1984; Orlick & Mosher,
1978; Thompson & Wankel, 1980) associated with greater
choice among exercise activities and goals, and exercise pro-
grams that enhance choice (e.g., lifestyle vs. programmed
exercise) have been associated with greater long-term exercise
adherence than programs with less or no choice (Epstein, Wing,
Koeske, & Valoski, 1985; Garcia & King, 1991). Providing
choice may also enhance the perception of control (Epstein,
Saelens, et al., 1995; Epstein, Valoski, et al., 1995). It has been
shown that people are more likely to begin exercise pro-
grams and adhere to those programs if they feel they are in
control of their exercise behavior, shown either by positive
relations between being physically active and internal locus
of control (Noland & Feldman, 1985; Slenker, Price, &
O'Connell, 1985) or negative relationships to external
control (Long & Haney, 1986). Likewise, weight control
programs for children and adolescents that maximize self-
control as opposed to parental control have been associated
with superior weight loss (Cohen, Gelfand, Dodd, Jensen, &
Turner, 1980), although this has not always been found
(Epstein, Wing, Koeske, & Valoski, 1986).
The equivalent changes in allocation of time from pre-
ferred sedentary behaviors to physically active behaviors in
the positively reinforced and punished groups suggest that
either positive reinforcement or punishment could be useful
in interventions to reduce inactivity. However, there are
reasons to favor the use of positive reinforcement over
punishment. Positive reinforcement has been associated
with positive affect and the desire to repeat the behavior to
gain access to positive reinforcers, whereas punishment has
been associated with negative affect, which is generated by
participants' perception of punishment as a coercive process
(Catania, 1980; Emurian, Emurian, & Brady, 1985; Sidman,
1989). Positive reinforcement has been shown to be more
likely than punishment to promote positive behavior when
the contingencies are removed (Rushton & Teachman,
1978), and a substantial body of research has suggested thatpositively motivated behavior is more likely to enhance
motivation for a behavior than punishment, which decreases
motivation to engage in a behavior (Fair & Silvestri, 1992).
Studies have shown that from the perspective of the
individual, punishment is evaluated negatively whereas
positive reinforcement is evaluated positively (Rachlin,
1989; Sidman, 1989). Likewise, persons who behave be-
cause of punishment or fear of criticism have been rated as
less intrinsically motivated than those who behave to receive
praise (Peterson & Gelfand, 1984). Finally, there are well-
documented differences in the acceptability (Heffer &
Kelley, 1987) of positive reinforcement and punishment that
favor positive reinforcement.
An alternative intervention for reducing time spent on
high-preference sedentary behaviors is to attempt to increase
activity by directly reinforcing children for being more physi-
cally active, willi minimal attention paid to sedentary alterna-
tives. Prior laboratory and clinical studies have suggested that
both reinforcing decreases in sedentary activity and reinforcing
increases in physical activity result in increases in physical
activity (Epstein, Saelens, et al., 1995; Epstein, Valoski, et
al., 1995). Reinforcing a reduction in high-preference seden-
tary behaviors differentially reinforces behaviors other than
the targeted sedentary behaviors (Differential Reinforce-
ment of Other Behavior schedule of reinforcement), and the
behaviors that are reinforced are chosen by the child.
Reinforcing a reduction in sedentary behaviors may enhance
perception of control over active behaviors more than
directly reinforcing physically active behaviors (Epstein,
Saelens, et al., 1995; Epstein, Valoski, et al., 1995), but this
has not been directly tested and additional laboratory and
clinical research addressing this comparison is needed.
Replicating the efficacy of reducing high-preference sed-
entary behavior to increase physical activity is a step in the
process of finding methods to produce enduring increases in
children's physical activity. Future research should explore
the effects of longer-term implementation of contingencies
that focus on reducing sedentary activity and the effects of
such contingencies on long-term physical activity levels.
The results of this study suggest that positively reinforcing
children for being less sedentary or punishing them for being
sedentary are both more effective methods for increasing
physical activity than a restriction method that reduces
access to the sedentary behaviors. However, positive rein-
forcement may be the more desirable method, as it was the
only strategy that both increased physical activity and
decreased liking for high-preference sedentary activities.
References
Blair, S. N. (1993). C. H. McCloy research lecture: Physical
activity, physical fitness, and health. Research Quarterly for
Exercise and Sport, 64, 365-376.
Catania, A. C. (1980). Freedom of choice: A behavioral analysis. In
G. H. Bower (Ed.), The psychology of learning and motivations
(pp. 97-145). New York: Academic Press.
Cohen, E. A., Gelfand, D. M., Dodd, D. K., Jensen, J., & Turner, C.
(1980). Self-control practices associated with weight loss main-
tenance in children and adolescents. Behavior Therapy, 11,
26-37.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
DECREASING SEDENTARY ACTIVITY 113
Dietz, W. H., & Gortmaker, S. L. (1985). Do we fatten our children
at the television set? Obesity and television viewing in children
and adolescents. Pediatrics, 75, 807-812.
Dishman, R. K. (1990). Determinants of participation in physical
activity. In C. Bouchard, R. J. Shepaid, T. Stephens, J. R. Button,
& B. D. McPherson (Eds.), Exercise, fitness and health (pp.
75-101). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Books.
Dishman, R. K. (1991). Increasing and maintaining exercise and
physical activity. Behavior Therapy, 22, 345-378.
Durant, R. H., Baranowski, T., Johnson, M., & Thompson, W. O.
(1994). The relationship among television watching, physical
activity, and body composition of young children. Pediatrics, 94,
449-455.
Emurian, H. H., Emurian, C. S., & Brady, J. V. (1985). Positive and
negative reinforcement effects on behavior in a three-person
microsociety. Journal of the Experimental Analysis of Behavior,
44,157-174.
Epstein, L. H. (1992). Exercise and obesity in children. Journal of
Applied Sport Psychology, 4, 120-133.
Epstein, L. H., Coleman, K. J., & Myers, M. D. (1996). Exercise in
treating obesity in children and adolescents. Medicine and
Science in Sports and Exercise, 28,428—435.
Epstein, L. H., Koeske, R., & Wing, R. R. (1984). Adherence to
exercise in obese children. Journal of Cardiac Rehabilitation, 4,
185-195.
Epstein, L. H., Saelens, B. E., & O'Brien, J. G. (1995). Effects of
reinforcing increases in active versus decreases in sedentary
behavior for obese children. International Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 2, 41-50.
Epstein, L. H., Smith, J. A., Vara, L. S., & Rodefer, J. S. (1991).
Behavioral economic analysis of activity choice in obese chil-
dren. Health Psychology, 10, 311-316.
Epstein, L. H., Valoski, A. M., Vara, L. S., McCurley, J., Wisniewski,
L., Kalarchian, M. A., Klein, K. R., & Shrager, L. R. (1995).
Effects of decreasing sedentary behavior and increasing activity
on weight changes in obese children. Health Psychology, 14,
109-115.
Epstein, L. H., Wing, R. R., Koeske, R., & Valoski, A. (1985). A
comparison of lifestyle exercise, aerobic exercise and calisthen-
ics on weight loss in obese children. Behavior Therapy, 16,
345-356.
Epstein, L. H., Wing, R. R., Koeske, R., & Valoski, A. (1986).
Effect of parent weight on weight loss in obese children. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 54, 400-401.
Epstein, L. H., Woodall, K., Goreczny, A. J., Wing, R. R., &
Robertson, R. J. (1984). The modification of activity patterns and
energy expenditure in obese young girls. Behavior Therapy, 15,
101-108.
Fair, E. M., & Silvestri, L. (1992). Effects of rewards, competition
and outcome on intrinsic motivation. Journal of Instructional
Psychology, 19, 3-8.
Garcia, A. W., & King, A. C. (1991). Predicting long-term
adherence to aerobic exercise: A comparison of two models.
Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 13, 394-410.
Gortmaker, S. L., Dietz, W. H., & Cheung, L. W. Y. (1990).
Inactivity, diet, and the fattening of America. Journal of the
American Dietetic Association, 90, 1247-1255.
Heffer, R. W., & Kelley, M. L. (1987). Mothers' acceptance of
behavioral interventions for children: The influence of parent
race and income. Behavior Therapy, 18, 153-163.
Hollingshead, A. B. (1975). Four Factor Index of Social Status.
Unpublished manuscript.
Hursch, S. R., & Bauman, R. A. (1987). The behavioral analysis of
demand. In L. Green & J. H. Kagel (Eds.), Advances in
behavioral economics (vol. 1, pp. 117-165). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.Keefe, F. J., & Blumenthal, J. A. (1980). The life fitness program: A
behavioral approach to making exercise a habit. Journal of
Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, 11, 31-34.
Long, B. C., & Haney, C. J. (1986). Enhancing physical activity in
sedentary women: Information, locus of control, and attitudes.
Journal of Sport Psychology, 8, 8-24.
Martin, J. E., & Dubbert, P. M. (1982). Exercise applications and
promotion in behavioral medicine: Current status and future
directions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50,
1004-1017.
Martin, J. E., Dubbert, P. M., Katell, A. D., Thompson, J. K.,
Raczynski, J. R., Lake, M., Smith, P. O., Webster, J. S., Skiora,
T., & Cohen, R. E. (1984). Behavioral control of exercise in
sedentary adults: Studies 1 through 6. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 52, 795-811.
Must, A., Dallal, G. E., & Dietz, W. H. (1991). Reference data for
obesity: 85th and 95th percentiles of body mass index (wt/ht2)
and triceps skinfold thickness. American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition, 53, 839-846.
Noland, M. P. (1989). The effects of self-monitoring and reinforce-
ment on exercise adherence. Research Quarterly for Exercise
and Sport, 60, 216-224.
Noland, M. P., & Feldman, R. H. L. (1985). An empirical
investigation of leisure exercise behavior in adult women.
Health Education, 16, 29-34.
Orlick, T. D., & Mosher, R. (1978). Extrinsic rewards and
participant motivation in a sport related task. International
Journal of Sport Psychology, 9, 27-39.
Pate, R. R., Pratt, M., Blair, S. N., Haskell, W. L., Macera, C. A.,
Bouchard, C., Buchner, D., Ettinger, W., Heath, G. W., King,
A. C., Kriska, A., Leon, A. S., Marcus, B. H., Morris, J.,
Paffenbarger, R. S., Patrick, K., Pollock, M. L., Rippe, J. M.,
Sallis, J., & Wilmore, J. H. (1995). Physical activity and public
health: A recommendation from the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention and the American College of Sports Medicine.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 273, 402-407.
Peterson, L., & Gelfand, D. M. (1984). Causal attributions of
helping as a function of age and incentives. Child Development,
55,504-511.
Rachlin, H. (1989). Judgment, decision, and choice: A cognitive/
behavioral synthesis. New York: W. H. Freeman.
Rushton, J. P., & Teachman, G. (1978). The effects of positive
reinforcement, attributions, and punishment on model induced
altruism in children. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin,
4, 322-325.
Sidman, M. (1989). Coercion and its fallout. Boston: Authors
Cooperative.
Slenker, S. E., Price, J. H., & O'Connell, J. K. (1985). Health locus
of control of joggers and nonexercisers. Perceptual and Motor
Skills, 323-328.
Thompson, C. E., & Wankel, L. M. (1980). The effects of perceived
activity choice upon frequency of exercise behavior. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 10, 436-443.
Tucker, L. A. (1986). The relationship of television viewing to
physical fitness and obesity. Adolescence, 21, 797-806.
Tucker, L. A. (1993). Television viewing and exercise habits of
8,885 adults. Perceptual and Motor Skills, 77, 938.
Tucker, L. A., & Bagwell, M. (1991). Television viewing and
obesity in adult females. American Journal of Public Health, 81,
908-911.
Wilkinson, L. (1992). SYSTAT for Windows: Version 5 edition.
Evanston, IL: SYSTAT.
Worsley, A., Coonan, W., Leitch, D., & Crawford, D. (1984). Slim
and obese children's perceptions of physical activities. Interna-
tional Journal of Obesity, 8, 201-211.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
