RESEARCH Open Access
How hard can it be to include research evidence
and evaluation in local health policy
implementation? Results from a mixed methods
study
Bridie Angela Evans1*, Helen Snooks1, Helen Howson2and Myfanwy Davies3
Abstract
Background: Although an evidence-based approach is the ideal model for planning and delivering healthcare,
barriers exist to using research evidence to implement and evaluate service change. This paper aims to inform
policy implementation and evaluation by understanding the role of research evidence at the local level through
implementation of a national chronic conditions management policy.
Methods: We conducted a national email survey of health service commissioners at the most devolved level of
decision-making in Wales (Local Health Boards –LHBs) followed by in-depth interviews with representatives of
LHBs, purposively selecting five to reflect geographic and economic characteristics. Survey data were analysed
descriptively; we used thematic analysis for interview data.
Results: All LHBs (n = 22) completed questionnaires. All reported they routinely assessed the research literature
before implementing interventions, but free-text answers revealed wide variation in approach. Most commonly
reported information sources included personal contacts, needs assessments, information or research databases. No
consistent approach to evaluation was reported. Frequently reported challe nges were: insufficient staff capacity
(17/22); limited skills, cost, limited time, competing priorities (16/22); availability and quality of routine data (15/22).
Respondents reported they would value central guidance on evaluation.
Five interviews were held with managers from the five LHBs contacted. Service delivery decisions were informed byWelsh Government initiatives and priorities, budgets, perceived good practice, personal knowledge, and local needs,
but did not include formal research evidence, they reported. Decision making was a collaborative process including
clinical staff, patient representatives, and partner organization managers with varying levels of research experience.Robust evaluation data were required, but they were constrained by a lack of skills, time, and resources. They viewed
evaluation as a means of demonstrating that targets had been met.
Conclusions: There is a gap between evidence-based aims of national health policy and how health services are
commissioned, implemented, and evaluated at local level. Commissioners and managers are unable to routinely
incorporate research evidence. If health services research is to identify most effective ways to implement high quality
care, it should be incorporated into commissioning and service delivery. Local commissioners and managers need tobuild the critical use of research evidence and evaluation into health policy implementation at local level in order to
provide consistent and effective healthcare services.
Keywords: Health policy implementation, Evidence-based policy, Research and evaluation, Chronic conditions
management, Health service delivery
* Correspondence: b.a.evans@swansea.ac.uk
1CHIRAL, ILS2, College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2013 Evans et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, andreproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Evans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
Introduction
Evidence-based policy making sits beside evidence-based
medicine as an ideal model for implementing healthcareservices [1]. Research can help policy makers, clinicians,
practitioners, and healthcare managers identify where
improvements are needed, evaluate existing systems, anddevelop new policies and services based on cumulative
learning from failures and success [2,3]. Including re-
search evidence within policy implementation can enabledecision makers undertake the ‘judicious application of
best current knowledge ’[4].
However, there are challenges in achieving this ideal
[5,6]. It is acknowledged that there are barriers both to
the uptake of research findings in practice —the second
gap in translation [7] —and to rigorous service evaluation
and audit at local levels [8]. Improving population health
outcomes relies on implementation of findings from
clinical and health services research, yet transfer of re-
search findings into practice is unpredictable and can be
slow and haphazard [9]. This has led to concerns about
equity of provision and access to services [10].
Some commentators describe a gap between the needs
of policy and decision makers at national level, who
must take account of population health needs and polit-ical priorities, and the motives of researchers who
prioritize the scientific process of generating research
[4,11]. Others say the mismatch lies between policy rhet-oric at a national level and the reality of implementing
change at local level [12]. It is known that decision
makers struggle to locate and assess relevant informa-
tion and to decide what information can be deemed evi-
dence [13-15]. The development of innovative tools to
summarize and synthesize research evidence to supportimplementation is one approach to overcoming the
research-practice gap [16]. Policy makers are reported to
find personal contact, timeliness, relevance, and the in-clusion of summaries with research-based policy recom-
mendations helpful. Absence of these alongside mutual
mistrust and struggles about power and budget restrict
the use of evidence [8].
Contextual factors, such as financial constraints, lack
of trust in the value of local research, and political influ-
ences, affect whether research is used in policy making
[17]. Services and staff can be constrained by policy and
funding decisions which are based on misunderstandings
of their working environment [18]. Health practitioners
underuse research-based information [19] while healthservice managers report insufficient time and expertise
to participate in research or don ’t perceive a benefit
from such activities [20]. Decision makers who develop
and implement policies at local level need to perceive
the relevance, cost-effectiveness, effectiveness, and impli-
cations of evidence-informed national guidance before it
is followed [21].Studies indicate that improved communication and
shared understanding is necessary to make research more
relevant and to clarify what commissioners and managers
need from academics [8,22]. The greatest opportunity for
effective evidence-based decision making may result from
joint or parallel working between researchers and those
developing, managing, and delivering policy and services,
plus a broader understanding of concepts of evidence and
policy, it is reported [5,20,23].
Against this background, researchers in two Welsh
universities were asked by Welsh government policy
makers to develop an evaluation strategy for a newevidence-based policy to manage chronic conditions
alongside policy implementation. Chronic disease repre-
sents a significant and increasing impact on health andsocial care services in the developed world [24]. The
highest United Kingdom (UK) rates are in Wales, where
at least one-third of adults and two-thirds of those agedover 65 report having at least one chronic condition
[25]. A new policy to improve management of chronic
conditions services was launched by the Welsh govern-ment in 2007 targeted at those with, or at risk of devel-
oping, chronic conditions. The objectives were to delay
onset or deterioration; improve quality of life and ability
to self-manage; and to reduce the burden on the National
Health Service (NHS) and social care services [26,27]. The
policy called for a ‘clear, consistent evidence-based ap-
proach to chronic conditions management ’[26], and set
out a model of care based on UK and international evi-
dence. The requirement to undertake monitoring andevaluation was an explicit stage in the implementation
cycle, to inform needs-based service planning and quality
assessment. It also demanded ‘strong leadership, courage
and determination at all levels ’to achieve the clear targets
listed in a subsequent Service Improvement Plan [27].
These ranged from completing needs assessments, strat-egies, and partnership plans, appointing core chronic con-
ditions management (CCM) community teams, developing
community care services and self care programmes, and
having effective data management systems for monitoring
and evaluation. Responsibility for implementation lay with
local health boards (LHBs). These organizations were in
charge of commissioning at the most devolved level of
local decision making. They had responsibility for local pri-
mary and secondary health services and were coterminous
with local authorities to aid co llaboration. In order to de-
liver the chronic conditions policy, LHBs were required to
work in close partnership with local authorities, the volun-
tary sector, and patients. Staff had responsibility for trans-
lating the policy and targets into action within the local
contexts of their respective health board areas and for
planning evaluation.
Although there are reported challenges to uptake of
research findings in policy making —the macro level —itEvans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 2 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
is not known how far this extends towards implementa-
tion and service delivery —the meso and micro levels
[28]. Examining whether research evidence is used andhow it is incorporated into decision making provides
valuable information to understand the process of health
policy implementation. Against a health policy back-
ground that highlighted research and evaluation, we de-
scribe the status and use of research evidence in
applying and delivering a prominent health service strat-
egy. We use these findings to discuss how research evi-
dence and evaluation may be routinely used in local
implementation of other health policies.
Aim and objectives
The aim of this study was to understand the role of re-
search evidence at the local level where national health
policy is interpreted and implemented in the form ofservice delivery models and interventions received by
patients.
Objectives were: to identify influences on decision-
making by commissioners and service managers when
implementing policy; to describe approaches to under-
taking evaluation of policy implementation at local level,
and challenges experienced; and to identify support
needed to undertake evidence-based implementation
and evaluation.
Methods
In this study, we used a mixed-methods approach in-corporating sequential data collection. We administered
questionnaires to all 22 LHBs in Wales, then carried out
semi-structured interviews with a sample of LHBs to en-
hance interpretation of survey data [29]. We adminis-
tered questionnaires in order to gather an overview of
attitudes and experiences within all local health boards.The purpose of the interviews was to explore in further
depth the issues raised by survey respondents.
We collected survey data from all 22 LHBs. These
organizations commissioned primary and secondary
healthcare services and were responsible for implement-
ing the chronic conditions services policy. This surveywas conducted before reorganization in 2009 restruc-
tured LHBs and reduced the number to seven.
The survey and interview guide were structured in line
with our study objectives. We developed a structured
questionnaire with some spaces for open-ended responses
in order to gather data on perspectives and approaches to-
wards implementing the new chronic conditions policy,
including use of research evidence. Questions related to
our study objectives and covered: decision making
when commissioning and implementing policy; and
approaches to research and evaluation including bar-
riers and facilitators.We circulated the questionnaire to all LHB Chief
Executives by email, with a request to pass it on for
completion by the person responsible for implementingand managing chronic conditions services. We included
information explaining that survey comments would in-
form development of a framework to evaluate imple-mentation of the new Chronic Conditions Management
(CCM) policy at national and local levels. We sent
reminders to non-respondents by email and made tele-
phone calls to maximize response rates.
In-depth interviews were then conducted by two
researchers (BAE, MD) with representatives of a sampleof LHBs to explore in more depth the experiences and
attitudes reported by commissioners and managers in
the questionnaires. We interviewed representatives fromone in four LHBs in order to gain a range of views. The
LHBs were selected purposively to reflect different geo-
graphic (rural/urban) and economic (deprived/affluent)
characteristics and different sized health boards. We
approached survey respondents or other senior staff with
responsibility for overseeing or implementing the chronic
conditions services to participate in the interviews. We
invited respondents by email and made follow-up tele-
phone calls to confirm arrangements. All those contacted
consented to interview (n = 5) so that the sample ad-
equately represented the sampling strata [30,31]. Inter-
views were undertaken face-to-face, or by telephone
where contact in person could not be arranged. Interviews
were tape recorded and detailed notes also made by the
interviewer. We designed the semi-structured interview
schedule in line with our study objectives, to expand on
the questionnaire data by further examining influences on
decision-making, identifying decision-makers, and explor-
ing how their own activities contributed to the evidence
base. Before conducting the interviews, we viewed ques-
tionnaire responses in order to be able to develop and ex-
plore respondents ’comments and any contradictions.
We followed principles and standards of ethical re-
search although formal approval was not required forthis study because it was classified as a service evalu-
ation. We obtained informed consent from all interview
participants. All study data were anonymized and stored
securely.
Data from the closed survey questions were managed
using Excel. We analysed survey data descriptively while
open question responses were analysed using a frame-
work developed from the study objectives and interviewtopic guide [32,33]. Two researchers (BAE, MD) studied
the interviews, and identified and coded relevant parts
of the interviewees ’responses within the framework ’s
headings. They discussed modifying themes and categor-
ies after considering all transcripts but chose to maintain
the original headings and groupings because they agreed
that the results consistently related to them. They thenEvans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 3 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
discussed key issues and areas of similarity and differ-
ence in order to agree results, which were structured
against study objectives.
Because interview responses expand on the question-
naire replies, we present the questionnaire and interview
results together. Results are presented against each study
objective because these underpinned the structure of all
data collection and analysis. We present quantitative sur-
vey results using simple frequencies and proportions and
give examples of free text responses. Quotations have
been selected and reported to illustrate the interview
results. They reflect the majority views, unless identified
as describing an uncommon response. Questionnaire free
text responses are identified with the LHB identification
number preceded by the letter Q ( e.g., Q1); interview
responses are identified by the letters IR and the identifi-
cation number ( e.g.,I R 1 ) .
Results
Response rates
We received completed questionnaires from all 22 local
health boards: 13/22 were completed by Directors or
Chief Executives; 9/22 were completed by senior nursesand CCM managers/coordinators. We undertook five
interviews with six staff members of five LHBs including
five senior CCM service managers and a Chief Execu-tive. Respondents held responsibility for putting policy
into operation and commissioning services and their re-
mit included resource allocation, service development,and implementation.
Influences on decision-making
When implementing new policies, respondents des-
cribed a decision-making process that incorporated
information from a variety of sources. All question-
naire respondents (n = 22) said they routinely assessed
the evidence base before implementing new policies,
although the term evidence was widely interpreted. One-
half of respondents reported basing decisions on mul-
tiple information sources, including National Public
Health Service information or research databases along-side locally collected data or personal contacts. Ques-
tionnaire respondents did not report using high-grade
research evidence sources, such as systematic reviews or
meta-analyses, although respondents Q16 and Q5 listed
literature reviews among the information sources
accessed in their organizations. Nor were there any
references to national guidance in the questionnaire re-
plies. Free text responses (see Table 1) defined evidence
as information derived from contacting other commis-sioners/project managers; involving service users within
multidisciplinary working groups; and undertaking local
needs assessment, evaluation, or service reviews.Interview respondents described in more detail the
range of influences that informed decisions about com-
missioning and implementing services under the new
chronic conditions policy. They did not report that re-
search evidence was included in those decision-making
processes. Instead, all the respondents explained how
government policy and initiatives were among the great-est influences. Respondents reported that targets framed
the commissioning context and drove decisions at all
levels. In their efforts to meet these requirements, theysaid that their organizations were quick to adopt any ini-
tiative, wholesale or piecemeal, if it appeared to offer
performance benefits. Interview respondent one dubbed
this as ‘jumping on any bandwagon ’(IR1).
They also reported that budgetary issues were influen-
tial in their commissioning choices, especially in a tough
financial climate. For example, money could be linked to
grant projects, which made commissioners feel forced to
make decisions for financial reasons, even if for theshort term. They felt that finance was often also linked
to government priorities and targets. Two interview
respondents said decisions on new services were made
on the basis of a business case.
Interview respondents reported that evidence of need,
as illustrated by needs assessment reports or routinely
collected local data, was used to inform strategic and
specific decisions. At one LHB, the respondent said staff
had confidence in these data and the review process.
More generally however, other respondents acknowl-
edged that this information was of weak quality andquestionable relevance. Shared knowledge and expertise
among professional colleagues was also reported to play
an important part in decision-making. This reliance on
networking was referred to as ‘responsive practice ’byTable 1 Free-text questionnaire responses describing
information sources used in commissioning
Question: When new services or service changes are planned, do
you routinely assess the evidence base?
Q6 We would undertake a full search of recent evidence online and
also attempt to speak to other areas in the UK who have
undertaken similar projects to benchmark and share good
practice.
Q12 Other LHBs have approached as to their experiences with CD
[compact disc], articles and evidence base been gathered ( sic).
Groups and multi-agency/multidisciplinary colleagues have been
consulted.
Q13 For interventions we would look to standard databases e.g.,
Medline. For service models we use Web Fetch to search
examples from other NHS organizations.
Q16 Data from NPHS, literature reviews available/best practice. Hear
from internal information, paper published, attending a
conference.
Q18 New services considered by disease specific group with clinical or
managerial lead, then passed to Steering Group attended by
medical director and director of public health.Evans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 4 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
one respondent (IR4). A senior manager said she had
implemented a particular care approach in her LHB be-
cause of her personal preference that was informed byprofessional contacts and not according to the national
policy and perceived local needs. Another respondent
listed a number of pragmatic reasons, including external
and internal organizational factors, that had informed
their planning and decision making. While the impera-
tive for action on implementation and service delivery
was said to be strong, the respondent summarized the
process as having ‘no coherent plan on the ground ...
the approach is fragmented ’(IR2).
Interview respondents said that decisions about using
research evidence were also influenced by the role and
experience of the decision takers. All respondents saidthat people with little or no research experience and
varying levels of clinical experience played a key role in
decision making across commissioning structures. Thesedecision makers were said to include clinical staff, pa-
tient representatives, and senior managers from different
organizations working together in forums. These forumsincluded: a steering group of general practitioners (GPs),
nurses, consultants and patient representatives advised
by specially-appointed task and finish groups; a manage-
ment group considered by the respondent to be without
clinical or evaluation experience; and a partnership of
LHB, NHS Trust, and local authority representatives.
Approaches to undertaking local policy evaluation and
challenges experienced
Table 2 presents questionnaire responses about LHBs ’
experience of, and plans for, evaluation. In response to
the question inviting them to describe their LHB ’s over-
all approach to research and evaluation, 21 respondents
stated that they would include data relating to structure,
processes, and outcomes in a typical evaluation, with the
other LHB answering they would not include any of
these. In free text replies, respondents reported that
approaches to undertaking research varied, from ‘ad hoc ’
(Q10) to ‘integral ’(Q14) but that it was rarely done in
collaboration with other LHBs. One recorded that two
attempts to initiate a local research network had failed;six respondents admitted that little or no research was
used or available locally. Most respondents (15/22)
reported that they were encouraged to build research
and evaluation into service delivery or development.
Free text responses revealed how the approaches to
evaluation varied. Respondents reported that they hadcommissioned an evaluation of a service redesign, colla-
borated with a university, or undertaken internal reviews
or audit. Other examples of their approaches to undertak-
ing evaluation were given as follows: developing a research
and development strategy; adhering to research govern-
ance process; working with GP and nurse research fellows;working with a service evaluation group; and collaborating
with a voluntary group.
In the questionnaires, all LHBs reported that they
intended to evaluate the CCM programme locally. One-
third of responses (n = 7) suggested these plans were in
hand by listing services to be evaluated and methods
proposed. These included a longitudinal patient study,
monitoring against performance indicators, before-and-
after survey, and analysis of routine data.
Questionnaire respondents all reported challenges to
undertaking local evaluations (Table 3). These included
lack of confidence concerning evaluation planning and
concerns about availability and quality of data. Theyacknowledged a lack of statistical and evaluation skills,Table 2 Responses to questions about LHBs ’experience
of, and plans for, evaluation
Question Yes No Don ’t
know
Were you aware of the forthcoming model for
Chronic Conditions Management (CCM) produced
by the Welsh Assembly Government, prior to receipt
of this questionnaire?21 1
In evaluating or monitoring a typical project, would
the following types of data be used?
oData relating to structure ( e.g., facilities, resources,
skills etc.)21 1
oData relating to processes ( e.g., care delivered, time
intervals, locations of delivery etc.)21 1
oData relating to outcomes ( e.g., health indicators,
satisfaction, mobility etc.)21 1
Do you have plans to evaluate existing and new
initiatives in CCM?21 1
When new services or service changes are planned,
do you routinely assess the evidence base?22
Would you be prepared to work with other LHBs to
evaluate initiatives on a wider scale?
oNationally 20 2
oRegionally 21 1
Table 3 Challenges faced locally by LHBs when carrying
out evaluation
Challenge Not challenge
Insufficient staff capacity 17 2
Limited skills 16 4Cost of evaluation 16 3Limited time 16 1Competing priorities 16 3Availability of routine data 15Lack of clarity about purpose 4 9Other 4Evans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 5 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
which they said impacted on their ability to plan and
undertake research. For example, Q4 reported ‘difficulty
in identifying outcomes that are robust and universallyaccepted ’and Q1 stated it was ‘difficult to determine
which data are suitable for measuring impact. ’Respon-
dents also reported that they lacked the time and
finances to undertake evaluations. These limitations were
reported to impact on the number of planned evaluations
and quality of research because, as Q15 reported, it was
‘done within current resources so often not as robust. ’
Interview respondents provided more detail about
approaches to evaluation. When undertaking evalua-
tions, interview respondents said that they used a mix of
quantitative data, generally focusing on admissions rates
and clinical measures, as well as measures of patientexperiences and quality of life. Interview respondent four
said evaluation was generally undertaken quickly and
retrospectively, relying on routine and survey data, oftenusing validated tools. Some external evaluations had
been commissioned by LHB5 to supplement in-house
research measuring change in relation to baseline data.However, respondents were uncertain how to proceed
with evaluation when these data were not available.
Interview respondents said they supported a rigorous
approach to undertaking evaluation within their organi-
zations and were glad to carry out, or commission, some
studies, but acknowledged there were instances wherelimited or no evaluations were undertaken. In some
cases this was because data, skills, or resources were not
available. One respondent said they generally undertookevaluation if it was feasible, although other respondents
reported that there were no routine systems for evaluat-
ing the services for which they carried responsibility.Variable access to data meant that, even when under-
taken, evaluation did not necessarily report what they
felt was useful information, respondents said:
‘a major step limiting effective research and evalua-
tion ...process can ’t be the proxy for outcomes ...if you
are going to do robust research and evaluation, you are
going to stop at the first door. ’(IR5)
There also appeared to be a tension between the
demands of delivering and accounting for services and
the independence and rigour of a research approach.
Respondents reported that commissioners told them
they wanted robust information to enhance decision
making in a tight financial climate, but in practice this
demand for high-quality evaluation could not always be
met because of the lack of evaluation skills among staff
and competition for limited time and financial resources.
They also said there were different understandings
within their organizations of the purpose of evaluation,
both strategically and at practitioner level. Respondent
three saw it as a rigorous approach where ‘independence
gives objectivity ...not to be pulled by your heart strings ’(IR3). Respondent one said there was a conflict of prior-
ities for nursing staff tasked with providing care and also
collecting evaluation data. Meanwhile, s/he was planninga service evaluation, but was not confident that the
organization would be interested in patient experiences
and health outcomes rather than measurements againstcentrally defined targets. Interview respondents felt that
all local health boards experienced the tensions between
service delivery and rigorous research. As a result, they
said they had low confidence in evaluation findings
reported by other LHBs because they perceived them to
be driven by the imperative to prove the targets had
been met, as respondent four noted: ‘The value of some
of the evaluations and the quality is not good. ’(IR4)
Support needed to undertake evidence-based
implementation and evaluation
Questionnaire and interview respondents suggested that
central guidance, technical and academic support, stan-
dardized approaches and frameworks to research and
evaluation, plus additional resources would help them to
carry out rigorous evaluation within their LHBs. Inter-
view respondents said they were cautious about receiv-
ing guidance from someone who might lack knowledgeand understanding of local health boards. They identi-
fied opportunities for better working between LHBs and
with local authorities to allow joint services and evalua-tions and thus enable better evaluation planning and
data sharing.
Areas requiring support included the development of
research and evaluation questions and methods, identify-
ing and accessing data, and undertaking analysis. Several
respondents believed that data access issues were sys-
tematic; some data about chronic conditions patients
were not routinely collected or linked between primary
and secondary health services, or there was a long time
lag until data were available. Another respondent did
not have confidence in the quality of available data. They
identified a need for improved skills and training but
also acknowledged they had little time to receive training
or undertake evaluations.
Discussion
Summary of findings
In this study of health service commissioners and man-
agers, research evidence was reported to be just one in-
fluence among a range of factors that were considered in
commissioning and implementing local policy. Govern-
ment targets, financial imperatives, and other informa-
tion usually played more important parts in these
decisions. Local influences on decision making arosefrom the interrelationship between financial pressures,
local political issues, and the need to deliver patient ser-
vices at the same time as meeting local needs, deliveringEvans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 6 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
national targets, and putting policy into practice. A lack
of skills, time, and resources limited the capacity of local
decision makers to undertake evaluation of new andexisting services. These factors reduced the opportunity
to contribute information to help further policy and ser-
vices planning. Where services were evaluated, the em-
phasis was on demonstrating that targets had been met
in order to justify resource use. Respondents said they
would value central evaluation support.
Strengths and limitations
We received a 100% response to the questionnaires, provid-
ing a comprehensive report of Welsh LHBs ’views. The
interview sample, while small, represented almost one-
quarter (5/22) of organizations. We aimed to minimize risk
of selection bias by our purposive sampling strategy and re-
quest to interview staff with similar areas of responsibility
and holding senior commissioning and managerial roles.However, we cannot be confident we identified the most ap-
propriate respondent or that the views of one staff member,
albeit a higher-level decision maker in their organization,could represent the whole or ganization. Additionally, the
small sample size does limit generalizability of results to
other populations and settings, and results should be inter-preted accordingly. This study was strengthened by our
mixed-method approach incorporating questionnaires and
interviews. Questionnaire results gave an overview of atti-
tudes and experiences within local health boards, although
only one survey was completed per organization. The inter-
views illuminated survey responses by allowing us to explore
issues in further depth. This enhanced our interpretation of
study findings.
Questionnaire and interview respondents in this study
were selected for their role in applying policy at a local
level through developing and implementing chronic con-
ditions services. As the research team was closelyinvolved in the process on a national level, some re-
sponse bias may be expected. The reported influence of
national policy agendas may have been heightened by
the timing of this study, which coincided with the well
publicized launch of the chronic conditions policy. Add-
itionally, we included information with the survey
explaining that results would inform the development of
a framework for evaluating the policy. Nonetheless, the
frankness of views expressed suggests that the relation-
ship of the team to the nationally-driven strategy was
perceived to offer participants a valuable opportunity to
engage national policy makers with the conflictingdemands of local policy delivery and evaluation.
Implications
Results of this study indicate that the environment of
local health commissioning and policy implementation
does not support an evidence-based approach. Evenwhen a government policy is underpinned by research
findings and builds ongoing evaluation into the imple-
mentation cycle, health service managers who commis-sion and implement policy at micro level are limited in
their ability to use research evidence and perform appro-
priate evaluation. In addition to the known lack ofevidence-based policy making at a national level and in
other policy making arenas [34-36], our study has identi-
fied a gap between the evidence-based aims of national
health policy and the practice of commissioning, imple-
menting, and evaluating health services locally.
Black suggests the relationship between research evi-
dence and policy making is weakened by competing
pressures on decision makers whose goals, such as social
relations or electoral considerations, are often at vari-ance with research evidence [5]. He challenges what he
calls the ‘implicit assumption of a linear relationship be-
tween research evidence and policy. ’He notes the
process is more interactive but also unbalanced, with re-
search evidence having most influence in central policy
and less at local level where policy making is marked by
negotiation and uncertainty.
In this study, which explored health policy implemen-
tation at local level, politically sensitive clinical and ser-vice delivery targets were set at a national level. At the
same time, national-level policy also required local deci-
sions to be evidence-based and evaluations to be object-ive. We observed these tensions in two phases and of
two kinds. Prior to the implementation of new services,
respondents described tensions between the resourcesrequired to appraise research in order to inform com-
missioning decisions and the resources needed to de-
velop and introduce health services effectively and in atimely manner. Once services were in place, managers
described tensions between the requirement to plan ob-
jective and effective evaluations and also to demonstrate
that targets had been reached. Thus, apparently contra-
dictory attitudes were reported which valued evidence-
based policy but struggled to effectively provide and useit in practice. This gap between publically prioritizing
health services research, accessing and considering evi-
dence to make decisions was reported by Macintyre
et al. who observed it at national level [37]. The complex
issues involved in linking research evidence to decision
making, plus the barriers to and facilitators of, research
utilization, have also been reported in other policy fields
[38-42].
Even when people with research experience were
included in the local health services decision-making
and implementation processes we studied, they facedmultiple demands and competing priorities. Respon-
dents could not always access research evidence and
lacked the skills to assess its significance and communi-cate this into the decision-making forum, as has beenEvans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 7 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
reported at policy level [8]. Meanwhile, they distrusted
the quality of research evidence generated by colleagues
and contemporaries. The study also highlights the finan-cial and political considerations that dominate each cycle
of health service policy and implementation [4]. Gold
says there is a ‘black box ’between the production of re-
search and its use in policy making, and notes how
much uncertainty exists in the process [43]. Our findings
identify that the challenges to uptake of research find-
ings at macro policy level are also found at this most
local point —the micro level of health service delivery
and implementation [28].
Within the decision-making processes described in
this study, led by people with senior managerial and
clinical experience, research evidence was just oneamong many influences. Some commentators argue that
research evidence should not be the only consideration
in policy and decision making, and that wider needs andvalues should be included [4,22,44]. Glasby and Beresford
point out that the knowledge and expertise of non-
academics also has a value within the commissioning anddelivery process:
‘what is currently constituted as ‘evidence ’is too often
dominated by academic researchers ...and neglects the
views and experiences of people who use and work in
health and social services ’[13].
The decision whether or not to incorporate research
evidence and evaluation into implementation may not
be a simple either/or process. A systematic review iden-
tified that the credibility and relevance of research andthe integration of findings with other information of real
usefulness to health-policy makers encourages their use
[11]. Respondents in this study prioritized locally rele-vant information sources and said that professional ex-
pertise, networking, and needs-based data were equally
valid influences in decisions about implementing healthservices. Thus, information appears to be selected on
the bases of credibility, relevance, availability, and how it
relates to other priorities.
Our findings reveal that the processes of implementing
and evaluating health policy at local level are complex and
driven by multiple influences. Health service commis-
sioners and managers are not able to incorporate research
evidence in any standard way. Our study demonstrates that
including research evidence and evaluation in policy imple-
mentation at local level is challenging and perceived to be
of uncertain benefit. This raises questions about the conse-
quence of omitting the evidence base from decisions [45].
If implementation is based on diverse, and specifically
local, information, it risks being inconsistent. This could
lead to variation in delivery and might ultimately affect pa-
tient care and outcomes if the most effective services are
not delivered. Inefficient use of resources reduces the op-
portunity to provide other services to meet need [46-48].If health services research is to identify the most ef-
fective ways to organize, manage, fund, and deliver high-
quality care [49], then it should be incorporated intocommissioning and service delivery processes. Local
commissioners and managers need to be able to build
research evidence and evaluation into local implementa-tion processes in order to provide consistent and effective
healthcare services. The use of research and evaluation in
local commissioning cannot flourish when local decision
makers do not access all available information sources.
The heavy reliance on non-research, or ‘unofficial ’evi-
dence, raises questions about the nature and scope of
decision-making processes. Further research is needed to
define this information and review its relevance.
Conclusion
There is a gap between the evidence-based aims of na-
tional health policy and how health services are commis-sioned, implemented, and evaluated at local level.
Commissioners and managers of local health services
are unable to routinely incorporate research evidence
into decision making. This study has identified that
known challenges to evidence-based planning and deci-
sion making at macro level are also evident at local, or
micro, levels of health services implementation. Locally
sourced information is seen as more relevant evidence
to inform decision making when implementing health
policy and health services.
If health services research is to identify the most ef-
fective ways to implement high-quality care, it should be
incorporated throughout levels of commissioning and
service delivery. The consequences for equity and effect-
iveness of service delivery of using local evidence rather
than research-based evidence are unclear. Local health
commissioners and managers need to build the critical
use of research evidence and evaluation into local imple-mentation in order to provide consistent and effective
healthcare services.
Abbreviations
CCM: Chronic Conditions Management; GP: General Practitioner doctorPatients in the UK access healthcare through the GP practice with whom
they are registered; LHB: Local Health Board the most devolved level of
decision-making in Wales Restructuring has reduced the number from 22 toseven; NHS: National Health Service The publicly funded healthcare systemin England, Scotland, and Wales.
Competing interests
Helen Howson was Senior Health Strategy Advisor and Head of CommunityHealth Strategy and Development at the Welsh Government when theChronic Conditions Management policy was developed, published and
implemented. Her department commissioned Swansea University to develop
a Framework to evaluate implementation of the policy. The other authorsdeclare they that have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
BAE undertook data collection, analysis and drafted the manuscript. HS was
study lead, developed the study, contributed to analysis and helped draftthe manuscript. HH contributed to study development and helped draft theEvans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 8 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
manuscript. MD undertook data collection, analysis and helped draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study
was funded by the Welsh Government.
Author details
1CHIRAL, ILS2, College of Medicine, Swansea University, Swansea SA2 8PP,
UK.2Medical Directorate, Welsh Government, Cardiff, Swansea, UK.3School of
Social Science, Bangor University, Bangor, UK.
Received: 21 May 2012 Accepted: 31 January 2013
Published: 12 February 2013
References
1. Ham C, Hunter DJ, Robinson R: Evidence based policymaking. Br Med J
1995, 310:71–72.
2. Bjorndal A: Improving social policy and practice: knowledge matters.
Lancet 2009, 373:1829–1831.
3. Sibbald B, Walshe K: Research that is both rigorous and useful. J Health
Serv Res Policy 2010, 15(Suppl 2):1 –2.
4. Muir Gray JA: Evidence based policy making. Br Med J 2004, 329:988–989.
5. Black N: Evidence-based policy: proceed with care. Br Med J 2001,
323:275–278.
6. Donald A: Commentary: research must be taken seriously. Br Med J 2001,
323:278–279.
7. Cooksey DA: A review of UK heath research funding . HMSO: London; 2006.
8. Innvaer S, et al:Health policy-makers' perceptions of their use of
evidence: a systematic review. J Health Serv Res Policy 2002, 7(4):239 –244.
9. Eccles MP, et al:An implementation research agenda. Implement Sci 2009, 4(18).
10. Majeed FA, et al:Equity in the NHS. Monitoring and promoting equity in
primary and secondary care. Br Med J 1994, 308(6941):1426 –9.
11. Merino GA, Lema LV: In Health technology assessment and health policy-making
in Europe . Edited by Garrido VM, et al. World Health Organisation on behalf of
the European Observatory on Health Systems and Policies; 2008.
12. Hamilton S, et al:Mind the gap between policy imperatives and service
provision: a qualitative study of the process of respiratory service
development in England and Wales. BMC Heal Serv Res 2008, 8(248).
13. Glasby J, Beresford P: Who knows best? Evidence-based practice and the
service user contribution. Critical Social Policy 2006, 26:268–284.
14. Petticrew M, Roberts H: Evidence, hierarchies and typologies: horses for
courses. JECH 2003, 57(7):527 –529.
15. Sheldon TA: Making evidence synthesis more useful for management
and policy-making. J Health Serv Res Policy 2005, 10(Suppl):S1:1 –S1:4.
16. MacFarlane A, et al:The e-health implementation toolkit: qualitative
evaluation across four European countries. Implement Sci 2011, 6(122).
17. El-Jardali F, et al:Use of health systems and policy research in the health
policymaking in eastern Mediterranean countries: views and practices ofresearchers. Implement Sci 2012, 7(2).
18. Pearce C, Hall S, Phillips C: When policy meets the personal: general
practice nurses in australia. J Health Serv Res Policy 2010, 15(Suppl 2):26 –34.
19. Forsetlund L, Bjorndal A: The potential for research-based information in
public health: identifying unrecognised information needs. BMC Publ
Health 2001, 1.
20. Ross S, et al:Partnership experiences: involving decision-makers in the
research process. J Health Serv Res Policy 2003, 8(Suppl 2):p. S2:26 –34.
21. Lourenco T, et al:Local decision-makers views' of national guidance on
interventional procedures in the UK. J Health Serv Res Policy 2010, 15:3–10.
22. Muir Gray JA, Porter T: Opportunity value. J Health Serv Res Policy 2009,
14(3):p 129 –130.
23. Klein R: Evidence and policy: interpreting the delphin oracle. J Royal Soc
Med 2003, 96:429–431.
24. World Health Organisation: Global health risks: mortality and burden of
disease attributable to selected major risks . Geneva: World Health
Organisation; 2009.
25. Welsh Assembly Government: A profile of long-term and chronic conditions
in Wales . Cardiff: Welsh Assembly Government; 2006.
26. Welsh Assembly Government: Improving health and the management of
chronic conditions in Wales: an integrated model and framework for action .
Cardiff: Welsh Assembly Government; 2007.
27. Welsh Assembly Government: Designed to improve health and the
management of chronic conditions in Wales: service improvement plan 2008 –
2011 . Cardiff: Welsh Assembly Government; 2008.28. HSR-Europe: Health service research: helping tackle Europe's health care
challenges . Utrecht: HSR-Europe; 2011.
29. Robson C: Real world research . Oxford: Blackwell; 1993.
30. Bryman A: Social research methods. Oxford, UK: OUP; 2001.
31. Silverman D: Doing qualitative research . 3rd edition. London, UK: Sage
Publications Ltd; 2010.
32. Ritchie J, Spencer L: Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research .
InThe qualitative researcher's companion . Edited by Huberman AM, MMB.
Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications; 2002.
33. Srivastava A, Thomson SB: Framework analysis: a qualitative methodology
for applied policy research. JOAAG 2009, 4(2):72-79.
34. Arney FM, et al:Integrating strategies for delivering evidence-informed
practice. Evidence & Policy 2009, 5(2):179 –191.
35. Bayliss HR, et al:Does research information meet the needs of
stakeholders? exploring evidence selection in the global management of
invasive species. Evidence & Policy 2012, 8(1):37 –56.
36. Meyer M: The rise of the knowledge broker. Sci Commun 2010, 32:118–127.
37. Macintyre S, et al:Using evidence to inform health policy: case study. Br
Med J 2001, 322:222–5.
38. Ward V, et al:Planning for knowledge translation: a researcher's guide.
Evidence & Policy 2010, 6(4):527 –541.
39. Gough D, Boaz A: Complexities of making use of research. Evidence &
Policy 2011, 7(3):247 –249.
40. Lomas J: Using ‘linkage and Exchange ’to move research into policy at a
Canadian foundation. Health Aff 2000, 19(3):p 236 –240.
41. Lavis JN, et al:How Can research organizations more effectively transfer
research knowledge to decision makers? The Millbank Quarterly 2003,
81(2):221 –248.
42. Moore G, et al:What works to increase the use of research in population
health policy and programmes: a review. Evidence & Policy 2011, 7(3):277 –305.
43. Gold M: Pathways to the use of health services research in policy. Health
Serv Res Policy 2009, 44(4):1111-1136.
44. Greenhalgh T: Chronic illness: beyond the expert patient. Br Med J 2009,
338:629–631.
45. McDonnell A, Wilson R, Goodacre S: Evaluating and implementing new
services British medical journal 332, 109 –112. Br Med J 2006, 332:109–112.
46. Appleby J, et al:Variations in healthcare: the good, the bad and the
inexplicable . Kings Fund: London; 2011.
47. Porter A, et al:Equity and service innovation: the implementation of a
bibliotherapy scheme in Wales. J Health Serv Res Policy 2008,
13(Suppl 2):26 –31.
48. Richards DA, et al:Delivering stepped care: an analysis of implementation
in routine practice. Implement Sci 2012, 7(3).
49. Agency for healthcare research and quality . http://archive.ahrq.gov/about/
whatis.htm.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-17
Cite this article as: Evans et al. :How hard can it be to include research
evidence and evaluation in local health policy implementation? Results
from a mixed methods study. Implementation Science 2013 8:17.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitEvans et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:17 Page 9 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/17
