COMMENTARY Open Access
Theories of behaviour change synthesised into a
set of theoretical groupings: introducing a
thematic series on the theoretical
domains framework
Jill J Francis1*, Denise O ’Connor2and Janet Curran3
Abstract
Behaviour change is key to increasing the uptake of evidence into healthcare practice. Designing behaviour-change
interventions first requires problem analysis, ideally informed by theory. Yet the large number of partly overlapping
theories of behaviour makes it difficult to select the most appropriate theory. The need for an overarching
theoretical framework of behaviour change was addressed in research in which 128 explanatory constructs from 33
theories of behaviour were identified and grouped. The resulting Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) appears to
be a helpful basis for investigating implementation problems. Research groups in several countries have conducted
TDF-based studies. It seems timely to bring together the experience of these teams in a thematic series to
demonstrate further applications and to report key developments. This overview article describes the TDF, provides
a brief critique of the framework, and introduces this thematic series.
In a brief review to assess the extent of TDF-based research, we identified 133 papers that cite the framework. Of
these, 17 used the TDF as the basis for empirical studies to explore health professionals ’behaviour. The identified
papers provide evidence of the impact of the TDF on implementation research. Two major strengths of the
framework are its theoretical coverage and its capacity to elicit beliefs that could signify key mediators of behaviour
change. The TDF provides a useful conceptual basis for assessing implementation problems, designing
interventions to enhance healthcare practice, and understanding behaviour-change processes. We discuss
limitations and research challenges and introduce papers in this series.
Background
Behaviour change is key to increasing the uptake of evi-
dence into healthcare practice. Behavioural science in
general, and health psychology in particular, abounds
with plausible, evidence-based theories and models that
purport to explain and predict behaviour and behaviour
change. It makes sense to design interventions on the
basis of such models. However, to the multidisciplinary
implementation research community and, often, to
health psychologists as well, there is a bewildering array
of theories from which to choose. Selecting one theory
or a few theories as the basis for intervention designleaves the researcher (or reviewer) in doubt as to
whether some key factor may have been omitted. The
need for an overarching theoretical framework has been
addressed in an influential line of research in which 128
explanatory constructs from 33 theories of behaviour
were identified [1]. Key constructs relevant to changing
the behaviour of healthcare professionals were grouped
into 12 ‘theoretical construct domains ’. The 12 domains
are labelled (1) Knowledge; (2) Skills; (3) Social/Profes-
sional Role and Identity; (4) Beliefs about Capabilities;
(5) Beliefs about Consequences; (6) Motivation and
Goals; (7) Memory, Attention, and Decision Processes;
(8) Environmental Context and Resources; (9) Social
Influences; (10) Emotion; (11) Behavioural Regulation;
and (12) Nature of the Behaviours. The resulting Theor-
etical Domains Framework (TDF) has been used in a* Correspondence: j.francis@abdn.ac.uk
1Health Psychology Group and Health Services Research Unit, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
© 2012 Francis et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Francis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35
Implementation
Sciencehttp://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
variety of contexts to inform and address implementa-
tion problems.
Interview questions and questionnaire items may be
designed to explore the specific content of these
domains in relation to implementation problems. The
TDF may also be used as a coding framework foranalysis. The theoretical domains are proposed to be
potential mediators of behaviour change (except for
Nature of the Behaviours, which is accorded a differ-ent status to the rest, as it relates to the essential
characteristics of the behaviour of interest rather than
possible mediating mechanisms or influences on be-haviour). Each domain consists of a grouping of the-
oretical constructs (where constructs are defined as
component parts of theories, such as ‘attitude ’,‘self-
efficacy ’, ‘anxiety ’). For example, the domain Social
Influences includes such co nstructs as social support,
group norms, group conformity, social pressure, socialcomparisons, and several others [1]. In this example
domain, the pertinent const ructs are grouped together
to represent the influences of people on others ’
behaviours.
Further consensus work has identified some of the be-
haviour-change techniques that are likely to be effective(and others that are likely to be ineffective) if they target
specific domains when these domains are identified as
likely mediators of change [2]. The 12 theoretical con-struct domains thus represent a large range of theoret-
ical approaches and can be used for problem analysis,
theorising pathways of change, designing interventions,identifying appropriate process measures, and testing
pathways to change [1].
Objectives of the thematic series
At this time, over 6 years after the publication of the ori-
ginal TDF paper [1], it is timely to document the impactof this framework on implementation research and to
consider its strengths, limitations, and potential for fur-
ther use and development. This article provides a briefoverview of the TDF and serves as an introduction to a
thematic series on the TDF for Implementation Science .
Research groups from several countries, exploring a var-
iety of implementation problems, have contributed to
this series in order to
(1) demonstrate the breadth of behaviours, clinical
settings, designs, and methods that have used the TDF;
(2) explain how the TDF can be applied and
operationalised to explore implementation problems
and design implementation interventions;
(3) describe theoretical and methodological
developments based on the TDF;
(4) raise questions that may suggest an agenda for
future TDF research.Utilisation of the theoretical domains framework in
implementation research
To document the impact of the TDF on implementation
research to date, we conducted a brief indicative review.
We searched the abstracts (and full text, if required, for
clarity) of all papers citing the paper that described thedevelopment of the TDF [1] to 30 November 2011 (iden-
tified through www.scopus.com). We selected, for fur-
ther description, the studies that used the TDF as thebasis for an empirical study. We noted the range of jour-
nals in which these studies were published, the countries
in which the studies were conducted, the behavioursinvestigated, and the study designs used. Where relevant
for identifying impact or validity, we also extracted the
specific findings or methods reported in these studies.
Of the 133 citing papers (from 83 scientific journals)
indexed in the Scopus database, 23 papers reporting 21
different studies used the TDF as the basis for an empir-ical study. Where a study protocol and a results paper
were published with respect to the same study, we
included only the results paper. Of the 21 studies identi-fied, 17 investigated the behaviour of health profes-
sionals and four investigated health-related behaviour of
members of the public. Ten of the 21 studies describedexploratory interview studies (with individuals or focus
groups) designed to identify barriers and levers to uptake
of a guideline [3-13], often to inform intervention de-sign. Two reports described questionnaire studies
[13,14], and two reported both interviews and question-
naires [15,16]. There were four systematic reviews inwhich the theoretical domains were investigated as med-
iators of behaviour change [17-20], two randomised
studies [21,22], and one protocol for a process evalu-ation study to explain trial effects in the context of
a randomised trial [23]. The included studies provide
evidence that the TDF has considerable breadth andcross-disciplinary impact in research about health-
related behaviour (studies were published in 13 journals)
and geographical reach (six countries from four conti-nents were represented). Table 1 presents a summary of
the characteristics of studies that have used the TDF to
investigate health behaviours.
Papers excluded from further description were editor-
ials and opinion pieces, empirical studies in which theTDF was used to support an aspect of the rationale, and
empirical studies based on other theories in which the
TDF was cited in the discussion of the study findings.
Discussion and critique
The TDF appears to have succeeded in ‘making psycho-
logical theory useful ’to researchers from a variety of
disciplinary backgrounds internationally, to investigate a
wide range of behaviours in various healthcare settings.
The great majority of the identified papers reportFrancis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 2 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
Table 1 Summary characteristics of studies citing the original Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) paper that used the framework in an empirical stu dy
Lead author, source, date Paper title Study design of TDF-based component Sample Behaviour; setting
Jacobs N. Patient
Education &
Counseling2011:85(1);122Effect of a cardiovascular prevention
program on health behaviour and BMI in
highly educated adults: A randomizedcontrolled trialRandomised
controlled trialHighly educated adults
(n = 314)Fat intake, physical
activity, smoking;
Belgium
Amemori M.
Implementation
Science 2011:6(1); 50Assessing implementation difficulties in
tobacco use prevention and cessation
counselling among dental providersQuestionnaire study Dental healthcare providers
(n = 73)Providing tobacco
use prevention
techniques and
cessationcounselling;Finland
Zhu D. Obesity
Reviews2011:12(501);e324The relationship between health
professionals ’weight status and attitudes
towards weight management: A systematicreviewSystematic review Health professionals from 14
independent samples(n = 10,043)Providing weight
management advice
Helms C. Vaccine
2011:29(16);2895Implementation of mandatory immunisation
of healthcare workers: Observations from
New South Wales, AustraliaInterview study Stakeholders from health department,
hospitals, health professional
associations, universities(n = 58)Immunisation of
healthcare workers;
Australia
Dyson J. Journal of
Infection Prevention
2011:12(1);17Does the use of a theoretical approach tell
us more about hand hygiene behaviour?
The barriers and levers to hand hygieneInterviews, focus
groups, and
questionnaire studyHealthcare practitioners
(n = 25, 21, 24 for interviews, focus
groups, and questionnaire,
respectively)Hand hygiene
behaviours; UK
Ivers NM.
ImplementationScience 2010:5(1); 98Feedback GAP: Study protocol for a
cluster-randomized trial of goal setting andaction plans to increase the effectiveness of
audit and feedback interventions in
primary careProtocol for process
evaluation, involvinginterviews, to
investigate barriers to
change in trial contextPrimary care practitioners
(target n = 12)Primary care;
Canada
Cuthbertson B. Trials
2010:11; 117A study of the perceived risks, benefits and
barriers to the use of SDD in adult critical
care units (the SuDDICU study)Protocol for
multistage feasibility
study involving
interviews for aDelphi studyFour stakeholder groups involved in
intensive care (critical care, infectious
diseases, pharmacy, nursing)
(target n = 120)Provision of
Selective
Decontamination of
the Digestive Tract
(SDD) in CriticalCare; UK, Canada,
Australia, New Zealand
McKenzie JE.
ImplementationScience 2010:5(1); 86Improving the care for people with acute
low-back pain by allied health professionals(the ALIGN trial): A cluster randomisedtrial protocolProtocol includes
interviews; findingsused to designinterventionPhysiotherapists and chiropractors in
Australia(210 practices)Behaviours from a
clinical practiceguideline for acutelow back pain;
Australia
Hetrick S.
AustralasianPsychiatry2010:18(5);451Promoting physical health in youth mental
health services: Ensuring routinemonitoring of weight and metabolic indicesin a first episode psychosis clinicInterview study Psychiatrists
(n not reported)Monitoring of
weight gain andmetabolic indicesin people with first
episode psychosis;
AustraliaFrancis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 3 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
Table 1 Summary characteristics of studies citing the original Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) paper that used the framework in an empirical stu dy
(Continued)
Brotherton JML.
Sexual Health2010:7(3):291National survey of general practitioners ’
experience of delivering the national humanpapillomavirus vaccination (HPV) programQuestionnaire study General practitioners
(n = 298)Delivery of HPV
vaccine, generalpractice; Australia
Clarkson JE.
Implementation
Science 2010:5(1);57The translation research in a dental setting
(TRiaDS) programme protocolQuestionnaires and
interviews used to
develop interventionsRange of samples,
dentistry staffRange of dental
care behaviours;
UK
Edwards P. BMC
Public Health2010:10;200Assessing the effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness of adaptive e-Learningto improve dietary behaviour: Protocol fora systematic reviewSystematic review Participants aged 13 years or over Dietary behaviour
Guillaimie L.
International Journal
of BehavioralNutrition & PhysicalActivity 2010:7;12.Psychosocial determinants of fruit and
vegetable intake in adult population:
A systematic reviewSystematic review General population(n = 34,577) Fruit and
vegetable intake
McCluskey A. BMC
Health ServicesResearch 2010:10;18Delivering an evidence-based outdoor
journey intervention to people with stroke:Barriers and enablers experienced bycommunity rehabilitation teamsBefore-after interview
studyAllied health professionals from two
rehabilitation teams(n = 13)Delivery of
evidence-basedoutdoor journeyintervention for
people with stroke;
Australia
Nzinga J.
ImplementationScience 2010:4(1); 44Documenting the experiences of health
workers expected to implement guidelinesduring an intervention study in Kenyan
hospitalsInterview study Health workers
(n = 29)Paediatric and
newborn care inhospitals; Kenya
Godin G.
ImplementationScience 2010:3(1); 36Healthcare professionals ’intentions and
behaviours: A systematic review of studiesbased on social cognitive theoriesSystematic review Studies of health professionals ’
behaviour(n = 78)Studies based on
social cognitivetheories
Francis JJ. British
Journal of Health
Psychology
2009:14(4);625Evidence-based selection of theories for
designing behaviour change interventions:
Using methods based on theoretical
construct domains to understand clinicians ’
blood transfusion behaviourInterview study Intensive care consultants and
neonatologists
(n = 18)Intensive care and
paediatric intensive
care; UK
Judah G. American
Journal of Public
Health
2009:99(Suppl.2)Experimental pretesting of hand-washing
interventions in a natural settingNaturalistic
randomised study;
hour of the day as unit
of randomisationGeneral population
(n = nearly 200,000 restroom uses)Hand washing in
public restrooms;
UK
Pitt VJ. Disability &
Rehabilitation
2008:30(25);1938Referral of people with osteoarthritis to
self-management programmes: Barriers and
enablers identified by general practitionersInterview study General practitioners
(n = 13)Referral of people
with osteoarthritis
to self-management
programmes;AustraliaFrancis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 4 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
Table 1 Summary characteristics of studies citing the original Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) paper that used the framework in an empirical stu dy
(Continued)
McKenzie JE.
Implementation
Science 2008:3(1); 11IMPLEmenting a clinical practice guideline
for acute low back pain evidence-based
manageMENT in general practice
(IMPLEMENT): Cluster randomisedcontrolled trial study protocolProtocol includes
focus group
interviews; findings
used to designinterventionGeneral practitioners
(target sample
size = 92 general practices)Behaviours from a
clinical practice
guideline for acute
low back pain;Australia
Michie S.
Implementation
Science 2007:2(1); 8Difficulties implementing a mental health
guideline: An exploratory investigation
using psychological theoryInterview study Professionals in community mental
health teams
(n = 20)Offering a family
intervention to
families of people
with schizophrenia;UK
BMI body mass index; GAP goal setting and action plans; SuDDICU selective decontamination of the digestive tract in intensive care units; ALIGN acute low-back pain: implementing guidelines iNto practice.Francis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 5 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
implementation research, and half of the identified
papers report interview studies. Critics of the TDF might
argue that an interview topic guide based on the frame-work is too focused and too constraining and would lead
participants to select only the views and opinions about
the topic that fit into the framework. However, one studyused randomised designs to make direct comparisons of
results when methods were based on the TDF versus
atheoretical methods, using interviews, focus groups,and a questionnaire [16]. Although there was consider-
able overlap in the findings from the two approaches,
the TDF-based studies elicited beliefs that were notmentioned in the studies that had no theoretical basis.
Furthermore, the data generated using the TDF ap-
proach were more likely to elicit beliefs about the impactof emotional factors on behaviours, demonstrating that
the framework does not limit its investigation to rational
or ‘cognitive ’processes [16]. This suggests that the the-
oretical coverage of the TDF is comprehensive and that
it can facilitate an inclusive, rather than selective, ap-
proach to exploratory research in the field ofimplementation.
Hence, two major strengths of the TDF are its theoret-
ical coverage and its capacity to elicit a comprehensiveset of beliefs that could potentially be mediators of be-
haviour change. In its current form and as currently
used, one limitation is that it is a descriptive frameworkrather than a theory, that is, it does not specify relation-
ships between the domains [9] and thus does not gener-
ate testable hypotheses. Another limitation relates to thefact that the majority of studies to date have used the
TDF in interview studies (Table 1), which are charac-
terised by the problem that data collected from an inter-view reflect participants ’attributions about the
influences on their behaviours, including possible attri-
butional biases [24,25], and may not necessarily reflect‘actual ’causes. However, this limitation is a function of
the research designs that are frequently used in TDF-
based studies rather than a limitation of the frameworkitself. In the context of interview studies, a further limi-
tation is that inter-coder agreement can be relatively low
[9], perhaps reflecting a difficulty that some research
teams have in clarifying the boundaries between
domains when the TDF is used as a coding framework.
It is perhaps appropriate to offer a word of warning to
researchers who wish to base their research on the TDF.
The domains integrate theoretical constructs thathave been developed during the course of a century of
theory-focused, empirical research in behavioural sci-
ence. This is both a strength and a weakness of the TDF.It is a weakness insofar as the depth of meaning of the
domains may not be evident to researchers without
training or experience in behavioural theory, so there isthe potential for the TDF to be poorly or superficiallyapplied. To use the framework effectively, researchers
need to ‘dig deep ’, beyond a superficial interpretation of
the domains. Thus, interdisciplinary research teamsusing the TDF for the first time may benefit from the in-
clusion of a health psychologist on the team. On the
other hand, a strength is that there is a wealth of evi-dence relating to these domains that can facilitate
researchers to finesse their exploratory research and to
map the results of TDF-based problem analysis on tointervention components. We would argue that this is
an effective way to build a solid rationale for implemen-
tation interventions.
Potential for further elaboration of the theoretical
domains
Although the TDF was developed to represent theories
of organisational behaviour as well as individual behav-
iour, some researchers interested in organisational-levelfactors may feel that such factors are not adequately ela-
borated in the framework. Domains that arguably focus
on these levels are Environmental Context andResources, Social Influences, Social/Professional Role
and Identity, and Behavioural Regulation. Table 2 pre-
sents some examples of constructs in these four domainsin the TDF [1] that represent the team or organisational
levels and shows that several organisational constructs
are indeed represented. Furthermore, it may be helpfulhere to distinguish between the level at which an inter-
vention may be delivered ( e.g., incentives offered by the
government to general practitioners for recording bloodpressure readings of people with diabetes) and the level
at which evidence of its impact may be measured (indi-
vidual general practitioners more frequently recordblood pressure readings). Hence, there appears to be rea-
sonable representation in the framework of organisa-
tional factors that are relevant to clinical behaviours,although it is likely that further elaboration would en-
hance the usefulness of the framework for researchers
interested in organisational-level influences.
Nonetheless, some organisational theories are not con-
cerned with the clinical actions performed by healthcare
workers in the process of delivering healthcare. For ex-ample, Karasek ’s Job Control Model [26] focuses on out-
comes such as burnout, staff turnover, job satisfaction,
and the like. Although these outcomes are importantissues in their own right and are arguably related to the
quality of healthcare provided, they are different from
the actions of healthcare workers as they deliver health-care and so are beyond the scope of the TDF. Thus, not
all organisational theories are appropriate for inclusion
in the framework.
The domain Nature of the Behaviour is often omitted
in TDF-based studies, with the reasoning that it relates
more to an understanding of the characteristics of theFrancis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 6 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
behaviour itself than to influences on behaviour [13].
However, it may be worth considering the wealth of re-
search following the Diffusion of Innovations approach[27] suggesting that the nature of the innovation ( i.e.,
the behaviour(s) targeted for change) can have a large
impact on its adoption. Inclusion of key factors ( e.g.,i s
the target behaviour complex, observable, trialable, high
profile [28]) could render this domain highly relevant for
designing interventions and predicting behaviourchange.
Links between the theoretical domains framework and
other frameworks
The TDF is potentially compatible with a range of exist-
ing frameworks in the implementation literature. For ex-ample, Kitson and colleagues [29] called for the
integration of theoretical perspectives into the Promot-
ing Action on Research in Health Services (PARiHS)framework. The TDF could be useful in elaborating
some components of the ‘diagnostic and evaluation ’
stage of PARiHS. Damschroder and colleagues [30] pro-posed a Consolidated Framework for Implementation
Research (CFIR); there is potential for mapping the TDF
domains on to constructs in this framework (in particu-lar, within Outer Setting, Inner Setting, and Characteris-
tics of Individuals). The advantage of such a process
would be to provide access to a large evidence base fromthe behaviour-change literature that could be useful in
CFIR-based research.
Further potential of the theoretical domains framework in
implementation research
The TDF is amenable to application in study designs
other than interview and questionnaire studies. For ex-
ample, it may be used as a conceptual framework to
guide structured observation of the target group and/orsupplementary data collection from other stakeholders
(that is, others affected by performance/nonperformance
of behaviour, such as patients or colleagues). TDF-basedinterview and observational studies may thus be seen as
hypothesis-generating investigations that are appropriate
in the earlier, exploratory phases of an implementationresearch programme.
The theoretical domains framework thematic series
In this TDF thematic series, a number of papers report
exploratory research with respect to a range of clinical
behaviours that, evidence suggests, should change sothat gains can be made in quality of healthcare and pa-
tient outcomes. Other papers in the series illustrate
methods that can be used when applying the TDF toproblem analysis, intervention design, and process evalu-
ation. Such approaches are consistent with calls for
more systematic methods of developing interventions,specifying the ‘active ingredients ’of interventions and
theorising the pathways to change [31,32].
The TDF was formulated to enhance the usefulness of
behavioural theory to researchers in a range of disci-
plines. Its success in generating research and contribut-
ing to problem solving in implementation research couldbe seen as a confirmation of its usefulness. Nonetheless,
further interrogation, validation, and refinement would
seem appropriate. A key paper in this series reports avalidation study that independently assesses the struc-
ture of the framework [33].
Conclusion
The TDF describes a comprehensive range of potential
mediators of behaviour change relating to clinicalactions. It thus provides a useful conceptual basis for ex-
ploring implementation problems, designing implemen-
tation interventions to enhance healthcare practice, andunderstanding behaviour-change processes in the imple-
mentation of evidence-based care. Nonetheless, some
unresolved issues remain. These include the relation-ships between the theoretical domains, possible lack of
precision of boundaries between domains, how best to
elaborate and operationalise the framework, how best toTable 2 Constructs in four theoretical domains, illustrating individual, team, and organisational levels (based on
construct allocations reported by Michie et al [1])
Domain Level
Individual Team Organisation
Environmental
Context andResourcesEnvironmental
stressorsPerson × environment
interactionEnvironmental
stressorsResources/material
resources (availabilityand management)
Social Influences Social support
Social pressureLeadership
Social comparisonsOrganisational climate/culture
Change management
Social/Professional
Role and IdentityIdentity
Professional identityProfessional
boundaries/role
Group/social identityOrganisational commitment
Behavioural
RegulationGoal/target setting
Self-monitoringGoal/target setting
Self-monitoringGoal/target setting
Barriers and facilitatorsFrancis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 7 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
design interventions informed by TDF-based problem
analysis, and how best to accumulate evidence to refine
the content of the framework. There are opportunitiesfor further international collaborative research to ad-
dress these issues.
Competing interests
DO is an Associate Editor of Implementation Science . All editorial decisions
regarding this article and all subsequent articles in the TDF series were made
independently by Robbie Foy, Deputy Editor-in-Chief.
Authors ’contributions
JJF drafted the initial form and all revisions of this manuscript. JC and DOprovided input, feedback, and substantial refinements. All authors agreed to
the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
JJF is funded by the Chief Scientist Office of the Scottish Government HealthDirectorates. DO holds an Australian NHMRC Public Health Fellowship
(606726). JC holds a Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR)
Postdoctoral Fellowship.
Author details
1Health Psychology Group and Health Services Research Unit, University of
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.2School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine,
Monash University, Victoria, Australia.3Clinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
Received: 22 December 2011 Accepted: 12 March 2012
Published: 24 April 2012
References
1. Michie S, Johnston M, Abraham C, Lawton R, Parker D, Walker A,
“Psychological Theory ”Group: Making psychological theory useful for
implementing evidence based practice: a consensus approach. Qual Saf
Health Care 2005, 14(1):26 –33.
2. Michie S, Johnston M, Francis JJ, Hardeman W, Eccles MP: From theory to
intervention: mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants to
behaviour change techniques. Appl Psychol: Int Rev 2008, 57:660 –680.
3. Helms C, Leask J, Robbins SC, Chow MYK, McIntyre P: Implementation of
mandatory immunisation of healthcare workers: observations from New
South Wales, Australia. Vaccine 2011, 29(16):2895 –2901.
4 Cuthbertson BH, Francis J, Campbell MK, MacIntyre L, Seppelt I, Grimshaw J:
A study of the perceived risks, benefits and barriers to the use of SDD inadult critical care units (The SuDDICU study). Trials 2010, 11:117.
5. McKenzie JE, O ’Connor DA, Page MJ, Mortimer DS, French SD, Walker BF,
Keating JL, Grimshaw JM, Michie S, Francis JJ, Green SE: Improving the care
for people with acute low-back pain by allied health professionals (theALIGN trial): a cluster randomised trial protocol. Implementation Science
2010, 5(1).
6. Hetrick S, Álvarez-Jiménez M, Parker A, Hughes F, Willet M, Morley K, Fraser R,
McGorry PD, Thompson A: Promoting physical health in youth mental health
services: ensuring routine monitoring of weight and metabolic indices in a
first episode psychosis clinic. Australas Psychiatry 2010, 18(5):451 –455.
7. McCluskey A, Middleton S: Delivering an evidence-based outdoor journey
intervention to people with stroke: Barriers and enablers experienced bycommunity rehabilitation teams. BMC Health Services Research 2010, 10:18.
8. Nzinga J, Mbindyo P, Mbaabu L, Warira A, English M: Documenting the
experiences of health workers expected to implement guidelines during anintervention study in Kenyan hospitals. Implementation Science
2009, 4:44.
9. Francis JJ, Stockton C, Eccles MP, Johnston M, Cuthbertson BH, Grimshaw
JM, Hyde C, Tinmouth A, Stanworth SJ: Evidence-based selection of
theories for designing behaviour change interventions: using methodsbased on theoretical construct domains to understand clinicians ’blood
transfusion behaviour. Br J Heal Psychol 2009, 14(4):625 –646.
10. Pitt VJ, O ’Connor D, Green S: Referral of people with osteoarthritis to self-
management programmes: barriers and enablers identified by generalpractitioners. Disabil Rehabil 2008, 30(25):1938 –1946.11. McKenzie JE, French SD, O ’Connor DA, Grimshaw JM, Mortimer D, Michie S,
Francis J, Spike N, Schattner P, Kent PM, Buchbinder R, Green SE:
IMPLEmenting a clinical practice guideline for acute low back painevidence-based manageMENT in general practice (IMPLEMENT): clusterrandomised controlled trial study protocol. Implementation Science 2008,
3:11.
12. Michie S, Pilling S, Garety P, Whitty P, Eccles MP, Johnston M, Simmons J:
Difficulties implementing a mental health guideline: an exploratoryinvestigation using psychological theory. Implementation Science
2007, 2:8.
13. Amemori M, Michie S, Korhonen T, Murtomaa H, Kinnunen TH: Assessing
implementation difficulties in tobacco use prevention and cessationcounselling among dental providers. Implementation Science 2011, 6:50.
14. Brotherton JML, Leask J, Jackson C, McCaffery K, Trevena LJ: National survey
of general practitioners experience of delivering the national humanpapillomavirus vaccination program. Sex Heal 2010, 7(3):291 –298.
15. Clarkson JE, Ramsay CR, Eccles MP, Eldridge S, Grimshaw JM, Johnston M,
Michie S, Treweek S, Walker A, Young L, Black I, Bonetti D, Cassie H, Francis
J, MacKenzie G, MacPherson L, McKee L, Pitts N, Rennie J, Stirling D, Tilley C,Torgerson C, Vale L: The translation research in a dental setting (TRiaDS)
programme protocol. Implementation Science 2010, 5:57.
16. Dyson J, Lawton R, Jackson C, Cheater F: Does the use of a theoretical
approach tell us more about hand hygiene behaviour? the barriers andlevers to hand hygiene. J Infect Prev 2011, 12(1):17 –24.
17. Edwards P, Felix L, Harris J, Ferguson E, Free C, Landon J, Lock K, Michie S,
Miners A, Murray E: Assessing the effectiveness and cost effectiveness of
adaptive e-Learning to improve dietary behaviour: Protocol for asystematic review. BMC Public Health 2010, 10:200.
18. Godin G, Bélanger-Gravel A, Eccles M, Grimshaw J: Healthcare
professionals ’intentions and behaviours: A systematic review of studies
based on social cognitive theories. Implementation Science 2008, 3:36.
19. Guillaumie L, Godin G, Vézina-Im L-: Psychosocial determinants of fruit
and vegetable intake in adult population: a systematic review. Int J
Behav Nutr Phys Activ 2010, 712.
20. Zhu DQ, Norman IJ, While AE: The relationship between doctors ’and
nurses ’own weight status and their weight management practices: a
systematic review. Obes Rev 2011, 12(6):459 –469.
21. Jacobs N, De Bourdeaudhuij I, Thijs H, Dendale P, Claes N: Effect of a
cardiovascular prevention program on health behavior and BMI inhighly educated adults: a randomized controlled trial. Patient Educ Couns
2011, 85(1):122 –126.
22. Judah G, Aunger R, Schmidt W, Michie S, Granger S, Curtis V: Experimental
pretesting of hand-washing interventions in a natural setting. Am J Public
Health 2009,
99(SUPPL. 2):S405 –S411.
23. Ivers NM, Tu K, Francis J, Barnsley J, Shah B, Upshur R, Kiss A, Grimshaw JM,
Zwarenstein M: Feedback GAP: Study protocol for a cluster-randomized
trial of goal setting and action plans to increase the effectiveness ofaudit and feedback interventions in primary care. Implementation Science
2010, 5:98.
24. Weiner B: An attributional theory of achievement motivation and
emotion. Psychol Rev 1985, 92(4):548 –573.
25. Stevens G: Bias in attributions of positive and negative behavior in
children by school psychologists, parents, and teachers. Percept Mot Ski
2002, 50(3):1283-1290.
26. Karasek R: Job Content Questionnaire and user ’s guide: University of
Massachusetts . Department of Work Environment Massachusetts: Lowell,
MA; 1985.
27. Rogers EM: Diffusion of Innovations . Glencoe: Free Press; 1962.
28. Foy R, MacLennan G, Grimshaw J, Penney G, Campbell M, Grol R: Attributes
of clinical recommendations that influence change in practice followingaudit and feedback. J Clin Epidemiol 2002, 55(7):717 –722.
29. Kitson AL, Rycroft-Malone J, Harvey G, McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A:
Evaluating the successful implementation of evidence into practiceusing the PARiHS framework: theoretical and practical challenges.Implementation Science 2008, 31.
30. Damschroder LJ, Aron DC, Keith RE, Kirsh SR, Alexander JA, Lowery JC:
Fostering implementation of health services research findings intopractice: a consolidated framework for advancing implementationscience. Implementation Science 2009, 4:50.
31. Dombrowski SU, Sniehotta FF, Avenell A, Coyne JC: Current issues and
future directions in Psychology and Health: towards a cumulativeFrancis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 8 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
science of behaviour change: do current conduct and reporting of
behavioural interventions fall short of best practice? Psychol Health 2007,
22(8):869 –874.
32. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M, Medical
Research Council G: Developing and evaluating complex interventions:
the new Medical Research Council guidance. BMJ 2008, 337:a1655.
33. Cane J, O ’Connor D, Michie S: Validation of the theoretical domains
framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research.
Implementation Science 2012, 7:x.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-35
Cite this article as: Francis et al. :Theories of behaviour change
synthesised into a set of theoretical groupings: introducing a thematic
series on the theoretical domains framework. Implementation Science
2012 7:35.Francis et al. Implementation Science 2012, 7:35 Page 9 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/7/1/35
