       
  
Citation for published version:
Gillison, F, Rouse, P, Standage, M, Sebire, S & Ryan, RM 2019, 'A meta-analysis of techniques to promote
motivation for health behaviour change from a self-determination theory perspective', Health Psychology
Review, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 110-130. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1534071
DOI:
10.1080/17437199.2018.1534071
Publication date:
2019
Document Version
Peer reviewed version
Link to publication
This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor and Francis in Health Psychology Review on
08/10/2018 available online: http://www.tandfonline.com/10.1080/17437199.2018.1534071
University of Bath
Alternative formats
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact:
openaccess@bath.ac.uk
General rights
Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and/or other copyright owners
and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights.
Take down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Download date: 18. Dec. 2023
 
1 
 A meta -analysis of techniques to promote motivation for health behaviour change from a self -
determination theory perspective  
*Fiona B Gillison1 
Peter Rouse1 
Martyn Standage1 
Simon J Sebire2 
Richard M Ryan3 
 
1Centre for Motivation and Health Behaviour Change, Department for Health, University of Bath, 
Bath, UK  
f.b.gillison@bath.ac.uk  
p.c.rouse@ba th.ac.uk  
m.standage@bath.ac.uk 
2Centre for Exercise, Nutrition & Health Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK  
Simon.Sebire@bristol.ac.uk  
3Department of Clinical & Social Sciences in Psychology, University of Rochester, US  
richard.ryan@rochester.edu  
*Corresponding author; Fiona Gillison, Department for Health, University of Bath, Bath, UK, BA2 
7AY; Telephone: 0044 1225 384387; f.b.gillison@bath.ac.uk  
 
 
 
2 
  
Abstract  
A systematic review and meta -analysis was conducted of the techniques used to promote 
psychological need satisfaction and motivation within health interventions based on self -
determination theory (SDT; Ryan & Deci, 2017). Eight databases were searched from  1970 -2017. 
Studies including a control group and reporting pre- and post -intervention ratings of SDT -related 
psychosocial mediators (namely perceived autonomy support, need satisfaction and motivation) with 
children or adults were included. Risk of bias w as assessed using items from the Cochrane risk of bias 
tool. 2496 articles were identified of which 74 met inclusion criteria; 80% were RCTs or cluster 
RCTs. Techniques to promote need supportive environments were coded according to two established 
taxonomies  (BCT v1 and MIT) , and 21 SDT -specific techniques, and grouped  into 18 SDT based 
strategies.  Weighted mean effect sizes were computed using a random effects model; perceived 
autonomy support g=0.84, autonomy g=0.81, competence g=0.63, relatedness  g=0.28, and motivation 
g=0.41. One-to-one interventions resulted in greater competence satisfaction than group -based  
(g=0.96 vs. 0. 28), and competence satisfaction was greater for adults ( g=0.95) than children ( g=0.11). 
Meta -regression analysis showed tha t individual strategies had limited independent impact on 
outcomes, endorsing the suggestion that a need supportive environment requires the combination of 
multiple co -acting techniques.  
 
 
Keywords: Motivation, behaviour -change, health behaviour  
 
  
 
3 
 Introduction  
Much of the potential for reducing the world’s disease burden in developed countries lies in changing 
people’s health behaviours. Lifestyle behaviours such as diet and physical activity are implicated in 
the development of disease states such as obesity, Type 2 diabetes, and metabolic syndrome, and 
changing these health behaviours can have as powerful an effect on health and wellbeing outcomes as 
the best available medical interventions (Djoussé, Driver, & Gaziano, 2009; Irwin et al., 2008) . 
However, behavioural interventions have largely not lived up to this promising potential in the longer 
term as they have struggled to bring about the maintenance of behaviour change (Avenell et al., 2004; 
Dombrowski, Knittle, Avenell, Araujo -Soares, & Snieho tta, 2014) . Evidence suggests that 
interventions that are grounded in behaviour change theory are more effective than those that are not 
(Prestwich et al., 2014) , and thus research that helps us to enhance the effective application of theory 
to practice ar e warranted. Theory also helps to ensure that a systematic and comprehensive set of 
determinants are addressed linking to evidence (Michie et al., 2016) , and is thus endorsed as part of 
best practice in intervention design (Craig et al., 2008; Moore et al. , 2015) .  
Self-determination theory  (SDT; Deci & Ryan, 2000; Ryan & Deci, 2017) has been 
highlighted as relevant to understanding the maintenance of health behaviour change (Kwasnicka, 
Dombrowski, White, & Sniehotta, 2016) . SDT provides a framework for int ervention development by 
setting out the necessary mechanisms of change that underpin changes in long term health behaviour 
(e.g., autonomy support, basic psychological needs and motivational regulations), and proposes 
techniques through which to influence  these malleable constructs (Fortier, Duda, Guerin, & Teixeira, 
2012) . There is strong evidence for the efficacy of interventions based on SDT across a wide range of 
health domains including environmental behaviours (Pelletier & Sharp, 2008) , tobacco depen dence 
(Williams, Niemiec, Patrick, Ryan, & Deci, 2009) , healthcare treatment adherence (Williams, 
McGregor, Zeldman, Freedman, & Deci, 2004) , and physical activity (Edmunds, Ntoumanis, & Duda, 
2008; Wilson et al., 2006).  However, insight into how such eff ects are brought about is limited by 
poor specification of the intervention techniques employed  (i.e., investigators may state that they 
provided an autonomy supportive environment  without stating  how they did so) , and by a lack of 
information about the im pact of specific techniques on the mediators of change proposed within SDT 
 
4 
 (e.g., need support and motivation); that is, it is often assumed techniques will have the hypothesised 
impact on mediators without this being explicitly tested. As such, the aim of  this paper is to synthesize 
findings across approximately five decades of empirical work to review the techniques used in SDT 
interventions and systematically identify their effect on specified mediators of change.  
Self-determination theory  
According to SDT, health behaviours are driven by a variety of motivations that vary along a 
continuum of autonomy (Deci & Ryan, 1985; Ryan & Deci, 2017 ). Intrinsic motivation , (acting for 
the inherent enjoyment of the activity involved) is the most autonomous form of motivation. 
However, when the health behaviour is not inherently enjoyable, one may still be autonomously 
motivated acting through integrated regulation (e.g., acting in line with one’s own goals and values) 
and identified regulation (e.g., acting to obtai n personally valued outcomes). When behaviour is not 
autonomous but driven by external forces (e.g., to avoid guilt or shame through  introjected 
motivation , or in response to reward and punishment through external regulation ) long -term health 
behaviour cha nge is unlikely (e.g., see Ng et al., 2012).  
Engaging in behaviours for more autonomous reasons results in more adaptive health 
outcomes, including more positive well -being, and better behavioural adoption and maintenance (Deci 
& Ryan, 2008) . More autonom ous motivation is facilitated through the satisfaction of three basic 
psychological needs; autonomy (feeling that one is empowered and has choice), competence (feeling 
that one can be effective and capable), and relatedness (feeling close to, and valued by  others) (Ryan 
& Deci, 2000b) . However, as with the application of all theories into pracitce, the challenge for 
practitioners is knowing how to facilitate need satisfaction most effectively in terms of the specific 
techniques and strategies. A step change  in facilitating this process has been brought about over the 
past decade through the development of taxonomies of behaviour change techniques . 
Taxonomies of behaviour change techniques  
Taxonomies of behaviour change techniques for different health behaviours have been developed to 
more systematically describe, develop and test the active elements of behaviour change interventions  
(Abraham & Michie, 2008; Michie et al., 2016)  and to descr ibe the content and relational -based 
techniques of inter -personal counselling styles (e.g., Hagger & Hardcastle, 2014; Hardcastle et al., 
 
5 
 2017; Lane, Huws_Thomas et al., 2005) . Within this approach, a behaviour change technique can be 
defined as “ an observ able, replicable and irreducible component of an intervention designed to alter 
or redirect causal processes that regulate behaviour; that is, a technique is proposed to be an “active 
ingredient” (e.g., feedback, self -monitoring and reinforcement) ” (Michie  et al., 2013, pp82).  By 
using a standardised description of techniques, researchers are able to conduct more meaningful 
comparisons of interventions according to the components they include, and thereby identify which 
techniques, or clusters of technique s, show the most promise in bringing about behaviour change in 
and across different health settings (Dombrowski et al., 2012; Gagnon, Forter, McFadden & Plante, 
2018; Michie, Abraham, Whittington, McAteer, & Gupta, 2009; Williams & French, 2011) . The 
syste matic specification of  SDT -based interventions,  specifically in relation to how practitioners can 
create a need supportive environment, has not been a core part of this process. While some of the 
techniques specified within other taxonomies do describe wha t SDT -based researchers are doing  
(given that there is often overlap betw een theories), there is not currently a systematic and consistent 
way of describing and analysing the content of SDT -based interventions . This paper sets out  to clarify 
the techniques  that can be used to translate SDT -based interventions into practice  exploring whether  
these can be captured using existing taxonomies, and whether there are techniques that are unique to 
this theoretical approach .  
To develop the most effective health interventions,  researchers and health practitioners not 
only need a clear taxonomy of the SDT -based strategies that can be employed, but also need to know 
the efficacy of these strategies. Knowledge of the impact that strategies have on the mediating 
const ructs (i.e., need satisfaction and motivation) is also important for theory expansion. To date there 
has been no investigation of the efficacy of SDT -based intervention strategies across studies and 
contexts on the proposed psychosocial mediators of behavi our change. Systematic and meta -analytic 
reviews that have been published provide support for the efficacy of autonomy (and/or other needs) 
support in promoting positive outcomes (e.g., Ng et al., 2012; Teixeira, Carraça, Markland, Silva, & 
Ryan, 2012; Web b, Joseph, Yardley, & Michie, 2010) , but there are none to date that address the 
efficacy of the strategies that can be used to create such autonomy - (or need -) supportive 
environments. The purpose of this systematic and meta -analytic review is to provide researchers and 
 
6 
 applied practitioners with the knowledge of how to operationalise SDT in an applied health setting. 
Specifically, we sought to (i) identify, synthesise and document the range of techniques that have been 
used to promote autonomous functioni ng, as defined within SDT, and (ii) meta -analyse the efficacy of 
SDT -based techniques in bringing about change in need satisfaction and motivation within health 
interventions.  
There is no one -size-fits all solution to health interventions, and interventio n fidelity, design 
and how an intervention is delivered can vary widely and be important in predicting outcomes 
(Hoffmann et al., 2014) . Therefore a third aim is to explore the factors that facilitate or moderate the 
effects of the identified techniques on  the psychosocial mediators. To this end, characteristics of 
intervention design that have previously been shown to moderate the effectiveness of health 
interventions will be investigated. We will test two hypotheses: First, that in line with work in other  
domains the inclusion of multiple techniques will enhance the impact of an intervention (Webb et al., 
2010) . Second, that perceptions of autonomy support and need satisfaction will be stronger in group -
based interventions that harness support from both a facilitator and other group members than in one -
to-one delivery of interventions (Jordan, Holden, Mason, & Foster, 2010) . Two exploratory analyses 
were also conducted: Past work with children and adolescents has demonstrated that they may have 
greater dema nd for structure (i.e., clear communication of rules and guidelines, opportunities to meet 
or exceed expectations, informational competence -based feedback and predictability) in order to 
perceive a genuine sense of autonomy than adults (Jang, Reeve, & Deci , 2010) . Such elements of 
structure may be perceived as controlling by adults. Therefore, to examine this possibility and other 
potential differences in how social environments are experienced across different developmental 
periods (Ryan & Deci, 2002)  we compared the effects of SDT -based intervention techniques  when 
conducted with children (age ≤ 17 years) and adults (age ≥ 18 years). Finally, given discussion 
regarding the impact on outcomes due to choice of control group (Williams, 2010) , we also planned to 
test whether type of control group also moderated outcomes.  
Methods  
 
7 
 The systematic review was conducted in line with PRISMA guidelines  (see Supplementary checklist ).  
No external funding was provided for this research.  
Search Strategy  
Three complimenta ry strategies were employed to locate published and unpublished manuscripts for 
inclusion in the study. First, a search of eight electronic databases (Web of Science, PsychInfo, 
Pubmed/Medline, Cochrane database, DARE, Biomed Central, Sociological abstract s, ProQuest) was 
performed using the keywords “Self -Determination Theory” combined with “intervention/ 
psychological need satisfaction/ internaliz(s)ation intervention/ internaliz(s)ation facilitat* / lab study/ 
experimental/ autonomy support/ competence s upport/ relatedness support” for studies published 
between 1970 and December 2017 2016. Following the deletion of duplicates, an initial pool of 2453 
articles was generated, which were individually screened for eligibility from the title and abstract.  
Clearly ineligible studies were removed (i.e., those that were not original research, or intervention 
studies) (Figure 1).  
<Figure 1>  
  Second, the SDT website was searched ( http://www.psych.rochester.edu/SDT ). All listed 
publications were scrutinized against the inclusion criteria, and further database searches were 
conducted for all listed SDT faculty m embers by name. This process resulted in the identification of 
further articles ( k=43). Third, a request for unpublished work was circulated on the SDT listserve, and 
researchers active in SDT -related intervention research were emailed individually to seek  unpublished 
data. This approach identified a further 6 articles. Reference lists from all included papers were 
examined for further pertinent articles ( PR). A total of 339 studies were found screened, of which 70 
provided insufficient data for extraction.  All authors were contacted via email to request additional 
information, of which 19 replies had been received after 3 weeks . Of th ese 19, five studies were 
inclu ded. Exclusion reasons for the remainder were; intervention  not grounded in SDT (k= 7), no 
access to data (n=  3), no pre -post assessments made (n =2), not an intervention (n=2)  and repeat data 
from studies already included (n= 1).  
 
8 
 Inclusion and exclusion criteria  
As the present review represents an initial stage in identifying the range of strategie s used, we chose 
not to restrict our review to particular health domains or populations. Therefore, we included studies 
conducted with both children and adults relating to interventions to bring about change in any health 
behavioural domain.  Studies were assessed according to the following inclusion criteria;  
1. Interventions conducted with adults and children without a mental disability.  
2. A comparison of effects between an intervention and control group  in a health -related setting . 
Acceptable control groups included no intervention, standard care (e.g., a usual school lesson, 
standard healthcare provision etc), an alternative intervention  that was not related to 
enhancing autonomous motivation (e.g., provision of information/advice, but not specifically 
autonomy supportive), or comparison groups that invoke controlling motivational regulations 
(e.g., experiencing controlling conditions, rather than purely a lack of autonomy support).  
3. Provision of pre - and post -intervention ratings of  SDT -related psychosocial mediators of 
behaviour change (as described in the subsequent Dependent variables section of this paper ) 
for both intervention and control groups or sufficient statistics from which to calculate 
between group effect size (e.g., F statistic, mean change score).   
4. Available in the English language.  
Dependent variables  
The following dependent variables (which are all proposed mediators within SDT) were specified; 
autonomy support, need satisfaction (namely autonomy, competence and relatedness), or motivation 
(including composite indices of controlled or autonomous motiva tion, a relative autonomy index, or 
motivational regulations; external regulation, introjected regulation, identified regulation, integrated 
regulation and intrinsic motivation).  
Identification of Behaviour Change Techniques  
All studies meeting the inclus ion criteria were reviewed independently by two researchers 
(FG and PR ) to identify and code the specific behaviour change techniques listed. Where available , 
 
9 
 we referred to protocol papers and supplementary data files for additional information , and where 
information was not clear the authors were contacted to provide a more detailed breakdown of 
intervention content . The descriptions provided  were matched against the v1 93 -technique  behaviour 
change  taxonomy  (Michie et al., 20 13) and the Motiva tional Interviewing Taxonomy (MIT) 
(Hardcastle, Fortier, Blake & Hagger, 2017) , referring to the detailed descriptions published in 
relation to each taxonomy. Where there is overlap between taxonomies (e.g., BCT v1 1.7 Review 
Outcome Goal and MIT 37 Review  Outcome Goal) both codes were allocated. Techniques not 
captured by either taxonomy were attributed a new descriptor as an SDT specific technique. 
Interventions described by the authors as ‘ motivational interviewing’  were coded as this alone ; no 
attempt w as made to then apply Hardcastle et al. (2017) taxonomy as our aim was not to judge the 
quality of MI delivery but investigate its impact on SDT -related outcomes.  
 The coders met to identify differences in coding and resolve differences in interpretation after 
coding of the first five studies ; we found the process of fitting author descriptions according to SDT 
convention s to taxonomies not devised with this in mind  to be challenging . For example, a frequently 
used technique to promote an autonomy supporti ve climate within the SDT literature is the provision 
of structure, but this can be facilitated in ways described by many existing techniques (e.g., goal 
setting, graded tasks, demonstration etc) as well as more relational activities (e.g., providing 
param eters within which choice can be made, so that choice is not overwhelming). Similarly, some 
SDT descriptors may overlap with other techniques but not match descriptions completely, for 
example ‘listening’ to participants is implicit within the MIT (e.g., t echnique 1, Open-ended 
questions), but not explicit (i.e., only if the practitioner demonstrates they are listening to the 
response). Thus, we engaged in an iterative process of comparing and discussing independently coded 
studies to arrive at the agreed set of codes for each. Reviewer agreement was calculated from the final 
24 independently coded studies (K = .68) accepting any alternative from the agreed similar codes 
(e.g., BCT 1.7 Review Outcome Goals or MIT 37 Review Ou tcome Goal).  
 As our intent was to highlight how need support is being operationalised within practical 
settings, to render the presentation of this data meaningful we clustered the techniques identified using 
other taxonomies around the descriptions comm only given by study authors to broader SDT 
 
10 
 ‘strategies’, relating to original theoretical SDT texts (e.g., Deci & Ryan, 1985; Deci et al., 1994; Deci 
& Ryan, 2008). While we acknowledge that a technique that supports one basic need may also impact 
others, we considered it useful to map techniques to specific needs . This method aims to support  
researchers  and practitioners  looking for ways to bolster particular needs and ensure they have 
designed a comprehensive intervention. The all ocation of particular str ategies to needs was 
determined through expert consultation , initial theoretical publications (Deci et al., 1994; Deci & 
Ryan, 1985 ), and author intent  in the studies downloaded .  
Analysis  
All analyses were computed on SPSS version 22  using Macros for computing weighted mean effect 
sizes published by Lipsey & Wilson (2001) . Mean change scores for each study were obtained by 
subtracting pre - from post -intervention scores, and calculating the pooled standard deviation of 
change.  Where f ull information was not available, the corresponding author was contacted with a 
request to supply the remaining data. The effect size for each study  was calculated as the 
standardized mean difference between the change in the experimental and control gro ups using 
Hedges bias correction for small or uneven sample sizes (i.e. pooled standard deviation ; Hedges & 
Olkin, 1985 ).  For studies with multiple time points, the time point closest to 3 months (the most 
common time -frame for intervention) was used as t he primary outcome. A composite score for 
autonomous regulation was computed for studies reporting individual regulations only where this was 
not provided (i.e., mean of intrinsic and identified regulations).  Effect size statistics were further 
weighted b y the inverse of the sampling error variance to account for more accurate estimates 
stemming from larger studies (Hedges & Olkin, 1985) .  A final estimate of effect for the entire sample 
of studies was then estimated through calculating a mean of the weigh ted effect sizes using a random 
effects model (Lipsey & Wilson, 2001) .  In line with recommended approaches ( Osbourne, 2013) 
extreme outliers were identified when the Z -score exceeded 3.29 (indicating that the probab ility of 
obtaining this through random s ampling is less than one time in a thousand; Tabachnick & 
Fidell, 2007) and removed from the analysis (k =4 of 330 data  points). Effect sizes were 
interpreted through applying Cohen’s criteria of small (0.2) medium (0.5) and large (0.8).   
 
11 
 The homogeneity of estimates was assessed through a Q test (sum of weighted square 
differences from the group mean, distributed on a χ2 distribution ; Lipsey & Wilson, 2001) , and the I2 
index was then calculated to quantify the degree of heterogeneity  (Huedo -Medina, Sánche z-Meca, 
Marín -Martínez, & Botella, 2006 ). An analogue to ANOVA was used to partition the variance 
between and within groups to establish whether homogeneity is improved (i.e. value of Q reduced) by 
accounting for a priori  grouping characteristics, thus potentially reducing the degree of unexplained 
heterogeneity between studies.   
Meta -regression analyses were conducted to explore the association between the 
presence/absence of specific techniques and study outcomes. To pr ovide the broadest perspective of 
what facilitated need satisfaction, given that techniques may support multiple needs, where possible 
we regressed all identified SDT strategies against need satisfaction and motivation. This was not 
possible for relatednes s given the smaller number of studies reporting this outcome, so in this case we 
restricted the analysis to just those techniques designated as primary contributors to this need (Table 
1)All techniques were entered simultaneously. As most studies included a number of strategies, the 
odds ratios of success (i.e., a significant improvement relative to control group) were computed for 
when 2, 3 or 4 or more strategies were reported to be used.   
Intervention Quality  
Intervention quality was rated through five questions from the Cochrane risk of bias tool  (coded 
yes/no); random group allocation, treatment allocation concealed, groups similar at baseline, outcome 
assessor blink, intention to treat analysis . A sensitivity analysis was conducted to compare weighted  
effect sizes computed using all studies, versus only those with random treatment allocation, and those 
reporting their findings using an intention -to-treat analysis or not.   
Results  
Of an initial pool of 4335 articles  extracted from database searches ( k= 4302 ) and other sources 
(k=43), 339 full studies were reviewed, and 74 studies met the inclusion criteria ( Figure  1). The 
majority were randomized controlled trials ( k=41) or cluster RCTs ( k=18). Quality scores range from 
 
12 
 1 to 5 out of a possible score of  5; 59 (80%) of studies were randomised, 23 (31%) were reported on 
an intent -to-treat basis, and 84% of studies scored three or more (Supplementary Table 1).   
Techniques used in intervention research  
The techniques used to target specific mediators of behaviour change are summarised in Table 1.  
Seventy techniques from existing taxonomies were identified ( 42 BCTs and 28 techniques from the 
MI taxonomy), and 21 techniques that were not adequately describe  and thus wer e allocated new 
‘SDT’ -specific labels . These together formed 18 SDT strategies , of which a mean of seven were used 
per study  (range 1 to 15).  
<Table 1> 
Measures of mediators  
The outcomes of interventions were grouped into five theoretically coherent clusters for analysis; 
perceived autonomy support ( k=20), autonomy satisfaction ( k=26), competence satisfaction ( k=34), 
relatedness satisfaction ( k=18), and autonomous motivation ( k=58). Controlled motivation was not 
included as an outcome as this is not c onsidered a positive target for intervention.  
Studies were conducted in a variety of health related domains; physical activity ( k =50), 
health education ( k=5), diet ( k=3), medical adherence ( k=5), dental health behaviours ( k=2), weight 
loss ( k=5), smoking  cessation ( k=1), alcohol reduction ( k=2) and carer behaviours ( k=1). In terms of 
setting, trials were run in schools ( k=25), health premises ( k=15), community settings ( k=18), 
universities or colleges ( k=7), workplaces ( k=1), in labs ( k=1) and online ( k=7). Most could be classed 
as health promotion activities as they focused on community living children or adults without 
established health conditions ( k=66; 89%). The majority of studies included both male and female 
participants ( k=54), but five studies wo rked with males only, and 15 with females only. There was 
considerable variation in the duration of interventions, with 19 studies reporting on short one -off 
interventions (e.g., instructions given at the start of class, or brief advice by a doctor), four delivered 
within one week, nine lasting between a week and a month, and 42 extending contact beyond one 
month. Finally, 42 studies reported on ‘usual care’ control groups, 28 tested an alternative non -
autonomy supportive intervention and 4 compared against a negative (controlling) climate. Details of 
 
13 
 the characteristics of the 74 studies included in the final analysis are provided in Supplementary File 
2. 
Main analysis  
Weighted mean between -group effect sizes were all in the predicted direc tions; perceived autonomy 
support g=0.84, autonomy g=0.81, competence g=0.63, relatedness g=0.28, and motivation g=0.41. 
Forest plots displaying these results are set out in Figure s 2 - 6.  Sensitivity analyses indicated similar 
effects (i.e., same interpretation of small, moderate or large effects) were found for autonomy, 
motivation and autonomy support when the analysis was restricted to only studies using intention -to-
treat analysis, with a larger effect reported for competence, but a  lesser (n o) effect for relatedness . 
Similar effects were estimated when restricting to studies with only randomized allocation (see Table 
3). As the effects were thus largely similar for higher and lower quality studies, all were included in 
the moderator  analysis.  
<Figure s 2 -6> 
There was significant heterogeneity in outcomes between studies for all mediators. On this 
basis, tests were conducted in line with the a priori  predictions relating to study characteristics to 
explore potential sources of variat ion.   
<Table 2> 
Number of techniques:  We aimed to test the hypothesis that the number of SDT strategies  used 
within a study predicts more positive study outcomes by computing odds ratios of the likelihood of 
achieving a meaningful effect on need satisfaction (i.e., an effect size ≥ 0.30) in the presence of two, 
three or four or more techniques. For all outc omes confidence intervals were very wide, spanning 
zero, so no robust conclusions as to the impact of the number of techniques used could be drawn 
(Supplementary Table 2). We also considered the odds of success for interventions implementing 
motivational i nterviewing as a means of promoting satisfaction for autonomy  and autonomous 
motivation , given its increasing use within applied SDT research (Markland, Ryan, Tobin, & 
Rollnick, 2005; Patrick & Williams, 2012; Vansteenkiste & Sheldon, 2006) . While t he conf idence 
 
14 
 interval s were large and positive, they  spanned zero (OR autonomy = 4.81, CI: -0.11, 3.25; OR 
autonomous motivation = 2.99, CI: -0.04, 1.23)so donot provide a robust indication of effect.  
Group versus one -to-one interventions : One-to-one interventi ons resulted in greater increases in 
competence satisfaction than group -based  interventions ( g=0.96, CI: 0. 57, 1.36 vs 0.28, CI: -0.11, 
0.68). There was no evidence for differences for other outcome variables.  
Child versus adult interventions:  There was a  large difference in the effect of interventions on 
competence satisfaction in children ( g = 0.11, CI: -0.34, 0.56) compared with adults ( g = 0.95, CI: 
0.59, 1.31). Given that the majority of interventions with children took place in a group setting ( 8%, 
predominantly in schools , 74% ), we considered conducting post -hoc analyses to explore whether the 
moderation effects of age and type of delivery were conflated. There were too few studies of the 
effect of one -to-one interventions with children for robust a nalysis. However, the effects of group vs 
one-to-one delivery  persisted for studies involving adults only; one -to-one interventions resulted in a 
weighted mean effect size for competence  satisfaction of 1.03 (CI: 0.57, 1.50; k=15) versus 0.74 (CI: -
.01, 1.49; k=6) for group interventions.  
Type of control group : Forty -two studies ( 57%) compared interventions against a standard care or 
wait list control (i.e., no add itional input provided). Four (5 %) compared against need thwarting or 
controlling control con ditions, and the remainder (28, 38%) provided alternative motivationally 
neutral input (e.g., information or advice beyond usual practice provided, but not in an autonomy 
supportive fashion). As may be expected, larger effect sizes were found for autonomy support and 
satisfaction in studies comparing interventions against need thwarting control conditions (Table 3). 
Effect sizes were also stronger when outcomes were compared against a neutral alternative 
intervention then to standard care or no treatment , except for competence satisfaction where the 
difference neared significance in the opposite direction (i.e., comparisons against neutral conditions 
were weaker than standard care) .  
Duration of intervention : There were no significant differences detected ac cording to the duration of 
the intervention.  
 
15 
 Performance of individual strategies  
The meta -regression analyses conducted to explore the strength of effect of different techniques used 
within SDT -based interventions indicated that the techniques together explained 82% of the variance 
in autonomy satisfaction, and 56% of the variance in c ompetence satisfaction , 50% of the variance in 
relatedness satisfaction, and 32% variance in autonomous motivation  (Table 4). Given the lower 
numbers for relatedness, it was not possible to run the full analysis with all 18 strategies (R2 
approached unity) , so only those theoretically loading onto relatedness (as shown in Table 1) were 
entered into the equation. As expected, the direction and strength of associations between strategies 
and outcomes was similar across needs. Autonomy satisfaction was only si gnificantly positively 
predicted by the use of non -controlling language  (β=1.86, p<0.05 ), but negative ly predict ed by 
involvement  (β=-2.56, p<0.01) . The only significant strategy in predi cting competence  was 
facilitating group co -operative tasks, although this operated in a negative direction ( β=-1.52, p<0.01). 
Conversely, r elatedness satisfaction was positively predicted by facilitating group co -operative tasks 
(β=0.58, p<0.05) but negatively by involvement ( β=-0.69, p<0.01)  Autonomous  motivation  was 
positively predicted by the inclusion of a rationale for behaviour change ( β=1.07, p<0.01 ), but 
negatively by structure ( β=-0.75, p<0.01) and the provision of information ( β=-1.17, p<0.01) .  
<Table 3> 
Discussion  
This meta -analysis is the first to unde rtake an evidence synthesis of the effect of practical techniques 
to operationalise SDT within interventions in health domains. It indicates that the techniques currently 
used in behaviour change interventions grounded within SDT have large, positive effec ts on 
perceptions of autonomy support and autonomy satisfaction, and moderate effects on competence 
satisfaction and motivation. While many approaches can be described using existing taxonomies of 
behaviour change or counselling style, 21 distinct techniqu es grounded in SDT theory were also 
identified. The findings for competence satisfaction in particular were moderated by  whether 
interventions were delivered to children or adults  (competence satisfaction was greater in 
interventions delivered to adults) , and in groups versus one -to-one settings ( in adults one -to-one 
 
16 
 settings resulted in greater competence satisfaction ). The type of control group used  also influenced 
the size, but not direction, of effects .  
A final aim of this meta -analysis was to explore the independent effect of individual 
techniques, to explore which may be necessary  components for successful SDT -based interventions, 
as has usefully been conducted with taxonomies relating to other theoreti cal techniques (Michie et al., 
2009; Michie, Hyder, Walia, & West, 2011; Michie et al., 2012) . Based on the present set of studies, 
there was limited evidence for the importance of specific strategies, although the use of non -
controlling language appear ed to be important for promoting autonomy satisfaction  and the provision 
of a rationale important for promoting autonomous motivation . However, contrary to theory, several 
strategies (encouraging group activities, demonstrating involvement with a client, pro viding 
information and structure) were significant negative predictors of at least one outcome  as will be 
discussed later.  
Moderation Effects  
Based on existing data, adults and children perceived similar benefits from the SDT -based 
interventions in terms o f autonomy and relatedness satisfaction, autonomous motivation and 
perceived autonomy support , although adults reported greater gains in competence satisfaction 
compared with no meaningful gain in children.  No studies provided a direct comparison of effec ts 
using the same intervention in both age groups, so it is possible that this finding relates to inherent 
differences between interventions delivered to adults and children rather than between their responses 
to a similar intervention ; most child interven tions took place in school in a similar format to, or even 
within, a school physical or health education class . As such, children’s feelings of competence may 
naturally draw on contextual levels of need satisfaction relevant to these commonly encountered 
settings (particularly if interventions are delivered by children’s existing class teachers) rather than 
reflecting a response to a novel setting . Many adult interventions involved an attempt  to adopt new or 
unfamiliar behaviours, for example becoming physi cally active after years of inactivity, cutting down 
on alcohol or learning to take medication  for which participants may have much less previous or 
contextual information to draw on . This fits with a hierarchical model of motivation, suggesting that 
child ren’s perceptions of social climates may be driven by stronger contextual -level factors as 
 
17 
 opposed to situational -level factors (Vallerand, 2007) , and thus their need satisfaction is more difficult 
to influence. In addition, a s many interventions included in this review were delivered in a ‘one off’ 
format, children may also not have time to shift their contextual beliefs (Gillison, Standage, & 
Skevington, 2013) . However , research is needed to test these  supposition s, and explore whether the 
difference betw een adults’ and children’s competence satisfaction reflects differences beyond novelty 
of the task. Past work that has measured adult and child need satisfaction within the same study has 
reported children to have higher levels of need satisfaction than th eir mothers (child M = 3.89 
SD=0.45 vs mother M=2.36 SD=0.91), but this relates to cross -sectional observations and not their 
propensity for change (van der Kaap -Deeder et al., 2015) .  
In relation to other moderated effects, we found that interventions del ivered in one-to-one 
settings  resulted in greater competence satisfaction for adults than those delivered within groups. Only 
three studies attempted one -to-one interventions with children, so there is insufficient data to test if 
this is also the case for  children. I t would be useful to test whether greater competence satisfaction in 
one-to-one settings stems from factors beyond the greater opportunity for tailoring and provision of 
personalised feedback. Further research may also be valuable in exploring how competence support 
could be strengthened in group settings, and whether the most effective techniques to achieve this 
differ between settings. Exploring the finding that the facilitation of co -operative group tasks had a 
negative effect on competence s atisfaction in the final meta -analysis would  be a good starting point.  
The final moderation effect showed that the type of control group influenced the size of 
effects, suggesting that attention to the nature of control groups is needed when interpreting study 
outcomes. Larger effect sizes were seen when need thwarting environments w ere induced as a 
comparator, and  providing an alternative ‘neutral’ condition (i.e., absence of need support) also ha d 
larger effects than no treatment (e.g., wait list) contro ls.  This may be as the people delivering 
standard care (e.g., school teachers, fitness advisors or clinicians) may naturally provide some degree 
of need support through their practice, and thus the difference between this and the active intervention 
may b e less exaggerated.  
Coding SDT interventions using existing Behaviour Change Taxonomies  
 
18 
 The process of coding SDT -based interventions according to existing taxonomies served to provide 
additional detail on how SDT has been operationalised in past work. Th rough using two existing 
taxonomies to code techniques at a more granular level than usually attempted, we identified 70 
individual techniques that mapped to the 18 broader ‘strategies’ to which SDT -research typically 
refers. This process revealed the wide  range of  ways in which the same broad SDT strategies are 
operationalised, provid ing insight to others as to how t hey can be achieved. F or example, the 
common ly stated  strateg y of ‘providing a meaningful rationale’ could  encompass four techniques 
within the 93 -item Behaviour Change Taxonomy ’s Natural Consequences grouping ( see Table 1 ), but 
also encompassed rationales unrelated to health outcomes that may be better described in relational 
terms (i.e., or the motivational interviewing technique of ‘ Coming alongside’ , or showing respect to a 
client by explaining processes ). There were 21 techniques that we did not feel were adequately 
encompassed by these existing taxonomies for which we suggest SDT -specific descriptors are 
required. Further investigation would be useful to explore what this additional level of specificity adds 
to the efficacy of outcomes; for example  going back to  the example of providing a rationale , 
investigating whether it matters what type of rationale  is provided, so long as a rationale of some sort 
is present . Similar breadth of techniques were observed for other SDT strategies.   
 As we coded a total of 70 different techniques across taxonomies  (plus 18 SDT -specific 
techniques) , this also brought chall enges for analysis in relation to assessing which have a greater 
impact on intended outcomes. To manage this process we therefore grouped the techniques into the 
SDT broader ‘strategies’ for meta -regression analysis. This approach is not without its limita tions, as 
it may mask effects (both negative and positive) of different individual techniques within each group. 
Nonetheless, some SDT strategies (such as providing structure ) are necessarily broad descriptors to 
allow for specification as appropriate to t he setting. For example, the structure you provide to children 
and adults for similar tasks would be different according to their experience and ability, and similarly 
the structure needed for simple versus complex tasks would differ.  It is also possible t hat the coding 
of behaviour change techniques without  concurrent verification that the techniques are delivered in a 
need supportive manner moves the coding process away from what is most pertinent to what SDT -
based interventions are aiming to achieve ; many behaviour change techniques (e.g., goal setting) 
 
19 
 could be delivered in either a controlling or an autonomy supportive manner and thus the technique 
itself may not be relevant, instead  the language and approach used. A similar tension exists in the 
coding of such techniques from a motivational interviewing perspective (see the separation of codes 
into relational vs content elements in the motivational interviewing taxonomy used in our coding 
process; Hardcastle et al., 2017). However, b y not coding co ntent -related  elements we risk 
overlooking  the compelling  findings from meta -analyses predicting behavioural outcomes that show 
consistent support for some specific content techniques (e.g., Michie et al., 2011; Greaves , Shephard, 
Abraham  et al, 20 11), whi ch may very likely contribute to participants’ feelings of competence (e.g., 
Williams & French, 2011) and be a means of facilitating structured choice (i.e., choosing one’s own 
goals).  There may also be interactions between the amount of structure found ac ceptable, and people’s 
preferences and expectations for choice and autonomy (i.e., their autonomy orientation). Taking each 
of these considerations into account , we felt that an initial exploration of the effect of techniques 
clustered into  SDT strategies was the most theoretically coherent , inclusive  and parsimonious means 
of dealing with the amount of data generated by the coding process.     
Performance of SDT strategies in predicting need satisfaction  
The findings relating to the performance of specific  strategies in promoting need satisfaction and 
motivation demonstrated a limited effect. This is not unexpected as SDT proposes that interventions 
should create a need supportive climate in order to bring about the internalisation of behavioural 
regulation s (Deci, Eghrari, Patrick, & Leone, 1994; Ryan & Deci, 2000b; Ryan & Deci, 2017) , in 
which it is implicit that such a climate is achieved by a combination of actions and communication 
styles. As such, the meta -regressions were not conducted as a means to i dentify stand -alone successful 
strategies , but to explore whether certain strategies may be particularly important to include among 
those implemented. The finding  of very few significant predictors among strategies further confirm s 
the limit ation  to considering need supportive environments as something that can be brought about 
through individual strategies. There was also no evidence that simply increasing the number of 
strategies resulted in stronger outcomes. This finding is similar to the assu mptions behind 
motivational interviewing, in that there is a certain ‘spirit’ of motivational interviewing that is 
important, that is more than j ust the sum of its parts.  
 
20 
  Of the strategies that did significantly predict outcomes, two were as predicted by theory; 
non-controlling language  significantly predicted autonomy satisfaction, and provision of a rationale  
predicted autonomous motivation. Conversely, involvement  with participants (i.e., showing a personal 
interest in a person, use of affirmation  etc) negatively predicted both autonomy and relatedness 
satisfaction. It is possible that this results from participants becoming reliant on that individual, or 
alternatively the finding may mask different effects of the 10 techniques subsumed within the 
strate gy; this  warrants further exploration. Facilitating group co -operation  showed some contrasting 
effects; it loaded negatively onto competence satisfaction, but positively onto relatedness satisfaction. 
This suggests that participants experienced the positiv e feelings of belonging when taking part and 
interacting with others, but doing so may have undermined their individual sense of competence when 
apart from the group. Finally, the provision of structure  and the provision of information  both 
negatively pred icted autonomous motivation. This may reflect that both of these strategies could be 
done in either an autonomy supportive or controlling manner  (implying that in some studies in the 
present analysis they were experienced as controlling) , and/or that they endorsed the feeling of the 
practitioner’s position of authority in directing the behaviour change.   
We noted during the process of extracting the techniques from intervention descriptions that 
there was a lack of detail in the reporting of some studies, and as a result it is likely that some 
techniques were present in the intervention but not identified as such in the description provided  (e.g., 
the provision of social support) . This will have reduced the specificity of our analysis. Nevertheless, 
we beli eve it is still useful to attempt to identify the most useful components within interventions to 
better understand how need supportive climates can be fostered, and improve the match between 
theory and practice in SDT -based research. The recent interest in  using motivational interviewing as a 
means to provide need support (Markland et al., 2005; Patrick & Williams, 2012; Vansteenkiste & 
Sheldon, 2006) illustrates that there is demand for a defined, testable and trainable approach with 
which to deliver inter ventions that promote autonomous motivation in practice. The approach has 
been shown to be effective in bringing about change in variety of health behaviours (Armstrong et al, 
2011; Lundahl et al., 2013; O’Halloran et al.,2014; VanBuskirk, 2014), and is attractive as it is a 
recognised clinical approach for which regulated training programmes ar e available. That is, it is clear 
 
21 
 what is being delivered, and people delivering interventions can be required to demonstrate a level of 
skill or qualification that helps to ensure minimum standards are met. The same systematic and 
consistent level of trai ning is not typically provided by research studies implementing other behaviour 
change or SDT -based techniques.  Limitations with the use of motivational interviewing include its 
lack of a theoretical foundation, such that the interpersonal contexts that p romote positive outcomes 
through motivational interviewing may be better understood via the processes within SDT (e.g., basic 
need satisfaction and autonomous motivation; Ryan & Deci, 2017), and challenges in delivering it 
outside one -to-one settings and l onger -term interventions (e.g., during school lessons, in group -based 
interventions).  Thus, the results of this review aim to contribute towards a similarly standardised set 
of styles and techniques that could be reliably taught and understood by people wo rking to promote 
health behaviours.  
Limitations  
This meta -analysis was limited by the comparability of studies. The intensity of interventions varied 
widely, ranging from experimental lab -based studies involving just one contact, to weekly group 
based trea tment sessions  lasting up to 12 months . The behaviours targeted varied from a 
comprehensive lifestyle change for weight loss, to tooth brushing or participation in physical 
education classes. With sufficient numbers, separate analyses differentiating healt h behaviour and 
setting would be informative; this is particularly the case for exploring the efficacy of the types of 
strategy most effective for each.   
 We explored the impact of risk of bias on outcomes through two sensitivity analyses, however 
there a re other practical markers of study quality that we could have used that may have been 
insightful. For example, quality in terms of the treatment that participants receive could be assessed 
through taking account of the implementation of interventions acco rding to their fidelity to protocol, 
participant attendance, or skill level of delivery teams. However, although his type of information is 
important, it is typically less reliably reported. Finally, the quality of reporting of the techniques used 
was ofte n weak. For example, some researchers assume that there is tacit understanding of what terms 
such as ‘autonomy support’ mean, so provided only examples of the types of strategies used rather 
 
22 
 than a full list, and other authors did not report them at all. W hile every attempt was made to contact 
authors for clarification, we were not able to obtain this information for all studies.  
Conclusion  
This review is the first to examine the techniques delivered within interventions to promote need 
satisfaction and au tonomous motivation for health behaviour change, and examine their efficacy, 
based on literature spanning five decades. The analysis of 74 intervention studies shows that the 
techniques in current use have the potential to bring about changes in the theore tical mediators of 
health behaviour change of a small (relatedness satisfaction and autonomous motivation), moderate 
(competence satisfaction) and large effect size  (autonomy support and satisfaction) . Positive effects 
are achievable in both children and a dults and across a wide range of health domains. Moderation 
effects for the satisfaction of competence highlight that there may be particular need to bolster the 
focus of this need support provided in group settings and in interventions delivered to childr en in 
particular. Within the limits of the research available, there was little evidence that any individual 
techniques are independently predictive of successful need support, endorsing the suggestion that a 
need supportive environment requires the combin ation of multiple co -acting techniques.  
  
  
 
23 
 References  
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in interventions. 
Health Psychology, 27 (3), 379 -387. doi: 2008 -08834 -010 [pii]10.1037/0278 -6133.27.3.379  
Avenell, A., Broom, J., Brown, T. J., Poobalan, A., Aucott, L., Stearns, S. C., . . . Grant, A. M. (2004). 
Systematic review of the long -term effects and economic consequences of treatments for 
obesity and implications for health improvement. Health Techno logy Assessment, 8 (21), iii -
iv, 1-182.  
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew, M. (2008). Developing and 
evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. BMJ, 337 , 
a1655.  
Deci, E. L., Eghra ri, H., Patrick, B. C., & Leone, D. R. (1994). Facilitating internalization: the self -
determination theory perspective. Journal of Personality, 62 (1), 119 -142.  
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (1985). Intrinsic Motivation and Self -Determination in Human Behavio r. 
New York: Plenum.  
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2008). Facilitating optimal motivation and psychological well -being 
across life's domains. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie Canadienne, 49 (1), 14.  
Djoussé, L., Driver, J. A., & Gaziano, J. M. (2009). Relatio n between modifiable lifestyle factors and 
lifetime risk of heart failure. JAMA, 302 (4), 394 -400.  
Dombrowski, S. U., Knittle, K., Avenell, A., Araujo -Soares, V., & Sniehotta, F. F. (2014). Long term 
maintenance of weight loss with non -surgical interventio ns in obese adults: systematic review 
and meta -analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ, 348 , g2646. doi: 10.1136/bmj.g2646  
Dombrowski, S. U., Sniehotta, F. F., Avenell, A., Johnston, M., MacLennan, G., & Araujo Soares, V. 
(2012). Identifying active i ngredients in complex behavioural interventions for obese adults 
with obesity -related co -morbidities or additional risk factors for co -morbidities: a systematic 
review. Health Psychology Review, 6 (1), 7 -32.  
Edmunds, G., Ntoumanis, N., & Duda, J. L. (2008) . Testing a self -determination theory -based 
teaching style intervention in the exercise domain. European Journal of Social Psychology, 
38, 375 -388.  
Fortier, M. S., Duda, J. L., Guerin, E., & Teixeira, P. J. (2012). Promoting physical activity: 
development  and testing of self -determination theory -based interventions. International 
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 9 , 20. doi: 10.1186/1479 -5868 -9-20 
Fransen, M., & McConnell, S. (2008). Exercise for osteoarthritis of the knee. The Cochran e Library .  
Gagnon, J. C., Fortier, M., McFadden, T. & Plante, Y. (2018).  Investigating the Behaviour Change 
Techniques and Motivational Interviewing Techniques In Physical Activity Counselling 
Sessions . Psychology of Sport & Exercise. 36, 90 -99. 
 
24 
 Gillison,  F. B., Standage, M., & Skevington, S. M. (2013). The effects of manipulating goal content 
and autonomy support climate on outcomes of a PE fitness class. Psychology of Sport and 
Exercise, 14 (3), 342 -352. doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2012.11.011  
Greaves, C. J ., Sheppard, K. E., Abraham, C., Hardeman, W., Roden, M., Evans, P. H., & Schwarz, P. 
(2011). Systematic review of reviews of intervention components associated with increased 
effectiveness in dietary and physical activity interventions.  BMC public health , 11(1), 119.  
Hagger, M. S., & Hardcastle, S. J. (2014). Interpersonal style should be included in taxonomies of 
behavior change techniques.  Frontiers in psychology , 5, 254.  
Hardcastle, S. J., Fortier, M., Blake, N., & Hagger, M. S. (2017). Identifying cont ent-based and 
relational techniques to change behaviour in motivational interviewing.  Health psychology 
review , 11(1), 1 -16. 
Hedges, L., & Olkin, I. (1985). Statistical Methods for Meta Analysis . Academic Press, Orlando 
(Florida, USA).  
Hoffmann, T. C., Glasziou, P. P., Boutron, I., Milne, R., Perera, R., Moher, D., . . . Michie, S. (2014). 
Better reporting of interventions: template for intervention description and replication 
(TIDieR) checklist and guide. BMJ, 348 , g1687. doi: 10.1136/b mj.g1687  
Huedo -Medina, T. B., Sánchez -Meca, J., Marín -Martínez, F., & Botella, J. (2006). Assessing 
heterogeneity in meta -analysis: Q statistic or I² index?.  Psychological Methods , 11(2), 193.  
Irwin, M. L., Smith, A. W., McTiernan, A., Ballard -Barbash, R.,  Cronin, K., Gilliland, F. D., . . . 
Bernstein, L. (2008). Influence of pre -and postdiagnosis physical activity on mortality in 
breast cancer survivors: the health, eating, activity, and lifestyle study. Journal of Clinical 
Oncology, 26 (24), 3958 -3964.  
Jang, H., Reeve, J., & Deci, E. L. (2010). Engaging students in learning activities: It is not autonomy 
support or structure but autonomy support and structure. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
102(3), 588.  
Jordan, J. L., Holden, M. A., Mason, E. E., & Fo ster, N. E. (2010). Interventions to improve 
adherence to exercise for chronic musculoskeletal pain in adults. The Cochrane Library .  
Kwasnicka, D., Dombrowski, S. U., White, M., & Sniehotta, F. (2016). Theoretical explanations for 
maintenance of behaviour change: a systematic review of behaviour theories. Health 
Psychology Review, 10 (3), 277 -296.  
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical Meta -Analysis  (Vol. 49). Thousand Oaks, 
California: Sage.  
Markland, D., Ryan, R. M., Tobin, V. J., & Rollnick, S. (2005). Motivational interviewing and self –
determination theory. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 24 (6), 811 -831.  
Michie,  S., Abraham, C., Whittington, C., McAteer, J., & Gupta, S. (2009). Effective Techniques in 
Healthy Eating and Physical Activity Interventions: A Meta -Regression. Health Psychology, 
28(6), 690 -701. doi: Doi 10.1037/A0016136  
 
25 
 Michie, S., Carey, R. N., Johnst on, M., Rothman, A. J., De Bruin, M., Kelly, M. P., & Connell, L. E. 
(2016). From theory -inspired to theory -based interventions: A protocol for developing and 
testing a methodology for linking behaviour change techniques to theoretical mechanisms of 
action . Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 1-12.  
Michie, S., Hyder, N., Walia, A., & West, R. (2011). Development of a taxonomy of behaviour 
change techniques used in individual behavioural support for smoking cessation. Addictive 
Behaviors, 36 (4), 315 -319. doi: 10 .1016/j.addbeh.2010.11.016  
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R., Parker, D., & Walker, A. (2005). Making 
psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: a consensus approach. 
Quality and Safety in Health Care, 14 (1), 26 -33. doi: 14/1/26 [pii]10.1136/qshc.2004.011155  
Michie, S., Richardson, M., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Francis, J., Hardeman, W., . . . Wood, C. E. 
(2013). The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered 
techniques: building an int ernational consensus for the reporting of behavior change 
interventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 46 (1), 81 -95.  
Michie, S., Whittington, C., Hamoudi, Z., Zarnani, F., Tober, G., & West, R. (2012). Identification of 
behaviour change techniques to red uce excessive alcohol consumption. Addiction, 107 (8), 
1431 -1440.  
Moore, G. F., Audrey, S., Barker, M., Bond, L., Bonell, C., Hardeman, W., . . . Wight, D. (2015). 
Process evaluation of complex interventions: Medical Research Council guidance. BMJ, 350 , 
h1258.  
Ng, J. Y. Y., Ntoumanis, N., Thogersen -Ntoumani, C., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M., Duda, J. L., & 
Williams, G. C. (2012). Self -determination theory applied to health contexts: A meta -
analysis. Perspectives on Psychological Science, 7 (4), 325 -340. doi: 
10.1177/1745691612447309  
Osbourne, J. W. (2013). Best practices in data cleaning: A complete guide to everything you 
need to do before and after collecting your data. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications.  
Patrick, H., & Williams, G. C. (2012). Self -determin ation theory: its application to health behavior 
and complementarity with motivational interviewing. International Journal of Behavioral 
Nutrition and Physical Activity, 9 (1), 18.  
Pelletier, L. G., & Sharp, E. (2008). Persuasive communication and proenvir onmental behaviours: 
How message tailoring and message framing can improve the integration of behaviours 
through self -determined motivation. Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne, 49 (3), 
210.  
Prestwich, A., Sniehotta, F. F., Whittington, C., Dombrows ki, S. U., Rogers, L., & Michie, S. (2014). 
Does theory influence the effectiveness of health behavior interventions? Meta -analysis. 
Health Psychology, 33 (5), 465 -474. doi: 10.1037/a0032853  
 
26 
 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000a). Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motiva tions: Classic Definitions and New 
Directions. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25 (1), 54 -67.  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000b). Self -determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic 
motivation, social development, and well -being. American Psyc hologist, 55 (1), 68 -78.  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2002). Overview of Self -Determination Theory: An Organismic 
Dialectical Perspective. In E. L. Deci & R. M. Ryan (Eds.), Handbook of Self Determination 
research  (pp. 3 -33). Rochester, NY: University of Ro chester Press.  
Ryan, R.M., & Deci, E.L. (2017). Self-determination theory: Basic psychological needs in motivation, 
development, and wellness . New York, NY: Guilford Press.  
Standage, M., & Ryan, R.M. (2012). Self -determination theory and exercise motivation:  
Facilitating self -regulatory processes to support and maintain health and well -being. In G.C. 
Roberts & D.C. Treasure (Eds.), Advances in motivation in sport and exercis e 
(3rd ed., pp. 233 –270). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.  
Teixeira, P. J., Carraça, E. V., Markland, D., Silva, M. N., & Ryan, R. M. (2012). Exercise, physical 
activity, and self -determination theory: a systematic review. International Journal of 
Behavioral  Nutrition and Physical Activity, 9 (1), 78.  
Vallerand, R. J. (2007). A hierarchical model of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation for sport and 
physical activity. In Hagger, M.S. & Chatzisarantis, N.L.D (Eds) Intrinsic Motivation and 
Self-Determination in E xercise and Sport.  Champaign, IL, US: Human Kinetics, pp375.  
van der Kaap -Deeder, J., Vansteenkiste, M., Soenens, B., Loeys, T., Mabbe, E., & Gargurevich, R. 
(2015). Autonomy -Supportive Parenting and Autonomy -Supportive Sibling Interactions The 
Role of Mo thers’ and Siblings’ Psychological Need Satisfaction. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 41 (11), 1590 -1604.  
Vansteenkiste, M., & Sheldon, K. M. (2006). There's nothing more practical than a good theory: 
Integrating motivational interviewing and s elf‐determination theory. British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 45 (1), 63 -82.  
Webb, T. L., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Michie, S. (2010). Using the internet to promote health 
behavior change: a systematic review and meta -analysis of the impact of theoret ical basis, use 
of behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery on efficacy. Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 12 (1).  
Williams, D. M. (2010). Importance of the nature of comparison conditions for testing theory -based 
interventions: comment on Mich ie and Prestwich. Health Psychology , 29(5), 467.  
Williams, S. L., & French, D. P. (2011). What are the most effective intervention techniques for 
changing physical activity self -efficacy and physical activity behaviour —and are they the 
same?.  Health educa tion research , 26(2), 308 -322. 
 
27 
 Williams, G. C., McGregor, H. A., Zeldman, A., Freedman, Z. R., & Deci, E. L. (2004). Testing a 
self-determination theory process model for promoting glycemic control through diabetes 
self-management. Health Psychology, 23 (1), 58-66.  
Williams, G. C., Niemiec, C. P., Patrick, H., Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2009). The importance of 
supporting autonomy and perceived competence in facilitating long -term tobacco abstinence. 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 37 (3), 315 -324.  
Williams , S., & French, D. (2011). What are the most effective intervention techniques for changing 
physical activity self -efficacy and physical activity behaviour —and are they the same? Health 
Education Research, 26 (2), 308 -322.  
Wilson, D. K., Griffin, S., Saund ers, R. P., Evans, A., Mixon, G., Wright, M., . . . Freelove, J. (2006). 
Formative evaluation of a motivational intervention for increasing physical activity in 
underserved youth. Evaluation and Program Planning, 29 (3), 260 -268.  
  
 
28 
 Table 1: Frequency of strategies reported to promote need satisfaction  
SDT strategies  Descriptor  Codes 
included  K studies 
per 
technique  Formal description of BCTs from 
other taxonomies  k studies per 
strategy (one 
or more codes)  Primary 
target*  
SDT1: Choice  Client is given choices and 
options  MIT 24  
 
 
 
 
MIT 32  
SDT 1± 
 16 
 
 
 
 
3 
43 Emphasise autonomy: The counsellor 
provides a statement that directly 
expresses motivational support, 
acknowledging the client’s ability for 
choice and  self-determination  
Consider change options  
Provide choice  
 44 Autonomy  
SDT2: Acknowledge 
participant’s 
perspective  Practitioner takes time to 
understand the Client’s 
perspective and recognise their 
challenges  MIT 2  
 
 
 
SDT 2  
 14 
 
 
 
28 Affirmation: The counsellor provides 
a statement of affirmation that 
acknowledges the client’s 
difficulties,  efforts and self -worth  
Acknowledge participant’s 
perspective  32 Autonomy  
SDT3: Provide a 
rationale  Practitioner provides a 
rationale for undertaking an 
activity  BCT 4.2  
BCT 5.1  
 
BCT 5.2  
BCT 5.3  
 
BCT 5.6  
 
SDT 3  
 2 
26 
 
2 
4 
 
4 
 
24 Information about antecedents  
Information about health 
consequences [of behaviour]  
Salience of consequences  
Information about social and 
environmental consequences  
Information about emotio nal 
consequences  
Provide a rationale  38 Autonomy  
SDT4: Use of non -
controlling language  Practitioner uses language that 
emphasises the client’s right to 
choose  SDT 4  22 Use of non -controlling language  23 Autonomy  
 
29 
 SDT5: Intrinsic goal 
orientation  Practitioner encourages 
identification of intrinsic (self -
concordant) goals  SDT 5  13 Intrinsic goal orientation  13 Autonomy  
SDT6: Structure  Practitioner sets parameters 
within which choice and 
agency can take place and 
provides support to initiate 
action  BCT 1.1  
BCT 1.3  
BCT 1.4  
BCT 4.1  
 
BCT 6.1  
BCT 8.1  
MIT 33  
 
 
SDT 6  34 
1 
8 
15 
 
6 
8 
4 
 
 
17 Goal setting (behaviour)  
Goal setting (outcome)  
Action  planning  
Instruction on how to perform the 
behavior  
Demonstration of the behaviour  
Behavioural practice/rehearsal  
Develop a change plan: (CATs) C - 
Commitment, A - Activation, T - 
Taking steps.  
Provide structure  48 Autonomy  
SDT7: Emphasise 
responsibility  Practitioner encourages the 
client to take on responsibility 
in decision making and/or 
leadership  BCT 12.2  
 
MIT 24  
SDT 7a  
 
SDT 7b  
SDT 9  7 
 
16 
12 
 
6 
13 Restructuring the social environment  
Emphasise autonomy  
Provide opportunities to take the lead  
Facilitate active participation in 
decision making  
Give responsibility  
Motivational interviewing  32 Autonomy  
SDT8: Explore 
reasons  Practitioner explores client’s 
reasons for changing behaviour  MIT 12  
 
 
 
 
SDT 8  5 
 
 
 
 
3 DARN questions - The counsellor 
uses open -ended questions that seek 
to elicit four subtypes of client 
motivational talk: Desire, Ability, 
Reason and Need.  
Explore participant’s reasons for 
change  7 Autonomy  
 
30 
 SDT9: Motivational 
Interviewing  Author describes the 
intervention as based on, or 
delivered through motivational 
interviewing  BCT 3.3  
SDT 9  19 
13 Social support (emotional)  
Motivational Interviewing  25 Autonomy  
SDT10: Task 
climate  Facilitation focuses on 
completing the process of the 
task, matched against one’s 
own standards, rather than the 
outcomes of the task  SDT 10  9 Provide a task oriented climate  9 Competence  
SDT11: Provide 
optimal challenge  Practitioner matches/tailors the 
level of the task to an 
individual client  BCT 8.7  
SDT 11a  
SDT 11b  8 
7 
7 
 Set graded tasks  
Provide optimal challenge  
Set challenging tasks  16 Competence  
SDT12:  Provide 
informational 
feedback  Practitioner provides feedback 
providing information of how a 
person achieved/did not 
achieve a desired outcome, 
rather than generic 
praise/criticism  BCT 1.5  
BCT 1.7  
BCT 2.2  
BCT 2.3  
BCT 2.4  
BCT 2.6  
BCT 2.7  
MIT 37  
SDT 12  11 
3 
22 
11 
2 
1 
3 
2 
19 Review behaviour goals  
Review outcome goals  
Feedback on behaviour  
Self-monitoring of behaviour  
Self-monitoring of outcome  
Biofeedback  
Feedback on  outcomes  
Review outcome goals  
Provide informational feedback  40 Competence  
SDT13. Provide 
information  Practitioner provides 
information to the client 
relevant to their needs and 
situation  BCT 4.2  
BCT 5.1  
 
BCT 5.3  
 
BCT 5.6  
 
SDT 13  2 
26 
 
4 
 
4 
 
18 Information about antecedents  
Information about health 
consequences [of behaviour]  
Information about social and 
environmental consequences  
Information about emotional 
consequences  
Provide personalised information 
(when not coded as any of the above)  36 Competence  
 
31 
 SDT14. Barrier 
identification  Practitioner works with the 
client to identify barriers to 
behaviour change  BCT 1.2  
MIT 19  
MIT 20  
 
 
 
 
SDT 14  20 
2 
3 
 
 
 
 
8 Problem solving  
Brainstorming  
Trouble shooting: The counsellor 
prompts the client to think about 
potential barriers and identify ways 
of overcoming them in order to 
strengthen motivation  
Barrier identification  23 Competence  
SDT15: Provide 
support and 
encouragement  Practitioner provides general 
support and encouragement 
(i.e., social support from the 
practitioner him or herself)  BCT 15.1  
MIT 2  
MIT 35  
 
 
 
MIT 36  
SDT 15a  
SDT 15b  3 
14 
3 
 
 
 
7 
3 
8 Verbal persuasion about capability  
Affirmation  
Support change/persistence: The 
counsellor functions as a partner or 
companion, collaborating with the 
client’s own expertise.  
Offer emotional support   
Express confidence  
Provide support and encouragement  25 Competence  
SDT16: Involvement  Express a personal interest in 
the individual and take time to 
develop a rapport  MIT 1  
MIT 2  
MIT 3  
MIT 12  
MIT 21  
 
MIT 27  
MIT 35  
MIT 36  
SDT 16a  
SDT 16b  
 2 
14 
3 
5 
7 
 
2 
4 
7 
9 
10 Open -ended questions  
Affirmation  
Reflective statements  
DARN questions  
Values exploration (open or 
structured)  
Coming alongside  
Support change/persistence  
Offer emotional support  
Show personal involvemen t 
Listening to participants  30 Relatedness  
SDT17. Encourage 
social support 
seeking  Practitioner encourages client 
to seek social support from 
others  BCT 3.1  
BCT 3.2  
BCT 3.3  
SDT 17  14 
9 
19 
10 Social support (unspecified)  
Social support (practical)  
Social support (emotional)  
Encourage social support seeking 
from others  34 Relatedness  
 
32 
 SDT18: Group co -
operation  Practitioner establishes 
interdependence within a 
group, or encourages 
cooperative peer -to-peer 
activities  SDT 18  11 Facilitate group co -operation  11 Relatedness  
SDT19. Use of 
incentives**   BCT 10.1  
BCT 10.2  
BCT 10.3  
BCT 10.10  1 
0 
2 
1 Material incentive (behaviour)  
Material reward (behaviour)  
Non-specific reward  
Reward (outcome)  3 **Autonomy  
(negative)  
 
 
* We acknowledge that the three needs are interrelated, and thus, techniques may support more than one need. However, we have  highlighted the primary 
need targeted by each; it is also implied that strategies fostering need support would also foster autonom ous motivation. ** Incentives are not typically an 
SDT -based technique, but have been coded as these can be theoretically associated with decreased autonomy support. ± Techniques labelled as “SDT(N)” 
refer to occasions when the technique is described by au thors as in column 2, the technique is listed again in column 3 to allow inclusion of the number of 
times the technique was listed to compare alongside techniques listed by other taxonomies.   
 
33 
 Table 2:  Weighted mean effect sizes and degree of homogeneity for outcomes according to study characteristics  
 Outcome variables  
  autonomy  
k=26  competence  
k=34  relatedness  
k=19  motivation  
k=60  Autonomy support 
k=19  
  ES  (95% CI)  ES (95% CI)  ES (95% CI)  ES (95% CI)  ES (95% CI)  
All studies  0.81a  (0.45, 1.16)  0.63 (0.35, 0.90)  0.28 (0.01, 0.54)  0.41 (0.25, 0.57)  0.84 (0.51, 1.17)  
 Q=608.00**  
I2=96%  Q=815.80**  
I2=96%  Q=161.78**  
I2=89%  Q=1020.60**  
I2=94%  Q=470.75**  
I2=96%  
RCTs only  0.54 (0.17, 0.91)  
k=17  0.51 (0.24, 0.78)  
k=25  0.15 ( -0.23, 0.53)  
k=11  0.39 (0.21, 0.58)  
k=46  0.82 (0.42, 1.23)  
k=15  
Intention to treat 
only 1.13 (0.22, 2.25)  
k=8 0.93 (0.09, 1.76)  
k=11  -0.00 ( -.73, 0.73)  
k=5 0.71 (0.36, 1.06)  
k=19  1.17 ( -0.82, 3.17)  
k=3 
Moderator analyses:   Q b ES 
(CI) Q  ES 
(CI) Q  ES 
(CI) Q  ES 
(CI) Q  ES 
(CI) 
Length of intervention  Q = 0.28  Q = 1.40  Q = 0.04  Q = 0.49  Q = 0.98  
 ≤ 1 month  k=9 0.94 
(0.33, 1.54)  k=13  0.41 
(-.05, 0.87)  k=4  0.33 
(-0.25, 0.91)  k=27  0.35 
(0.11, 0.58)  k=10  1.01 
(0.54, 1.48)  
 > 1 month  k=17  0.74 
(0.29, 1.18)  k=21  0.76 
(0.40, 1.13)  k=15  0.26 
(-0.06, 0.58)  k=31  0.46 
(0.24, 0.69)  k=9 0.66 
(0.16, 1.17)  
 
34 
 Age of participants  Q = 0.17  8.18**   0.13  0.00  0.03  
 Children  k=13  0.87  
(0.36, 1.41)  k=13  0.11 
(-0.34, 0.56)  k=10  0.23 
(-0.14, 0.60)  k=32  0.41 
(0.19, 0.63)  k=10  0.83 
(0.33, 1.32)  
 Adults  k=13  0.73 
(0.21, 1.26)  k=21  0.95 
(0.59, 1.31)  k=9 0.33 
(-0.08, 0.74)  k=26  0.41 
(0.17, 0.66)  k=9 0.89 
(0.36, 1.42)  
Mode of delivery  Q = 1.01  5.58
*  0.04   0.73  0.00  
 One-to-one  k=10  0.57 
(-0.02,  1.17)  k=17  0.96 
(0.57, 1.36)  k=5  0.32 
(-0.22, 0.87)  k=20  0.31 
(0.03, 0.59)  k=4  0.84 
(0.10, 1.58)  
 Group  k=16  0.96 k=17  0.28 
(-0.11, 0.68)  k=13  0.26 
(-0.07, 0.58)  k=38  0.46 
(0.26, 0.67)  k=15  0.85 
(0.47, 1.24)  
Control group  Q = 5.30 (p=0.07)  5.70±  0.57  15.34
**         6.64
*  
 Standard care/ no 
intervention  k=14  0.51 
(0.00, 1.03)  k= 20  0.62 
(0.26, 0.99)  k=11  0.18 
(-0.19, 0.55)  k=30  0.19 
(-0.03, 0.41)  k=8  0.60 
(0.08, 1.12)  
 Neutral alternative c k=10  0.96 
(0.35, 1.56)  k= 13  0.49 
(0.05, 2.16)  k=8 0.40 
(-0.02, 0.82)  k=25  0.52 
(0.28, 0.76)  k=9 0.79 
(0.31, 1.27)  
 
35 
  
 
 
 
Notes: ± p=0.05, * p<.05, ** p<.01,*** p<.001; g = weighted effect size (Hedges’ g); k = number of studies; Q stat is the between group statistic; a the first 
point of assessment post intervention was used in each case (range 0 [i.e., immediately post intervention] to 104 weeks); b between group ; c an alternative 
intervention provided witho ut autonomy/need support. Where cells are empty, too few studies were available for meaningful comparison for that particular  
analysis.  
 
 
   Undermining 
autonomy  k=2 2.16 
(0.80, 3.52)  k=1 - k=0  - k=3  1.59 
(0.89, 2.30)  k=9  2.12 
(1.08, 3.17)  
 
36 
 Table 3: Meta -regression for strategies to promote need satisfaction and autonomous motivation  
 
 
 Autonomy satisfaction  
(k=26)  Competence satisfaction  
(k =34)  Relatedness satisfaction  
(k =19)  Autonomous motivation  
(k =59)  
 Mean ES: 0.81, R2: 0.82  Mean ES: 0.63, R2: 0.56  Mean ES: 0.30, R2: 0.99  Mean ES: 0.42, R2: 0.32  
Strategy  B (SE)  95% CI  B (SE)  95% CI  B (SE)  95% CI  B (SE)  95% CI  
SDT1: Choice  -0.59 (0.54)   
 -1.64, 0.47   -0.35 (0.59)   
 -1.51, 0.80  - - -0.10 (0.27)     -0.62, 0.42   
SDT2: Acknowledge 
participant’s perspective  0.54 (0.79)  
 -2.09, 1.01    0.47 (0.63)     -0.77, 1.700  - - 0.59 (0.39)    -0.16, 1.35   
SDT3: Provide a rationale  0.15 (0.91)  
 -1.64, 1.94     0.21 (0.70)   -1.15, 1.58    - - 1.07**  (0.41)     0.26, 1.89    
SDT4: Use of non -
controlling language  1.86* (0.82)    
 0.26, 3.47    0.70 (0.88)   -1.02, 2.43     - - -0.27 (0.34)    -0.94, 0.41   
SDT5: Intrinsic goal 
orientation  -0.58 (0.75)  
 -2.1, 0.89     -0.73 (0.79)   -2.28, 0.82    - - -0.14 (0.38)    
 -0.90, 0.61    
SDT6: Structure  -1.00 (0.82)   
 -2.60, 0.61  0.63 (0.58)  -0.51, 1.76   - - -0.85** (0.32)    -1.47, -0.23  
SDT7: Emphasise 
responsibility  -0.26 (0.58)     -1.40, 0 .89  -0.31 (0.50)   -1.29, 0.67    - - -0.17 (0.26)    -0.67, 0.33   
SDT8: Explore reasons  - - - - - - 0.58 (0.46)    -0.32, 1.48    
SDT9: Motivational 
Interviewing  0.01 (0.95)  -1.86, 1.88  -0.85 (0.66)   -2.14, 0.45  - - -0.32 (0.35)    -1.00, 0.36  
SDT10: Task climate  0.02 (0.59)     -1.1, 1.17  0.64 (0.67)   -0.67, 1.95     - - -0.23 (0.39)    -1.00, 0.54   
SDT11: Provide optimal 
challenge  1.06 (1.23)   -1.36, 3.48     -0.29 (0.93)   -2.12, 1.54    - - -0.54 (0 .36)   -1.25, 0.17   
SDT12:  Provide 
informational feedback  0.04 (0 .77)   -1.15, 1.86     0.60 (0.56)    -0.48, 1.69   - - 0.38 (0.28)    -0.18, 0.93   
 
37 
 SDT13. Provide 
information  -0.20 (1.03)   -2.23, 1.82  -1.16 (0.82)   -2.77, 0.45   - - -1.17** (0.35)   -1.85, -0.49   
SDT14. Barrier 
identification  -0.23 (0.95)  -2.09, 1.62    0.20 (0.72)   -1.20, 1.61   - - 0.26 (0.29)    -0.32, 0.83     
SDT15: Provide support 
and encouragement  1.21 (0.88)    -0.53, 2.95    0.86 (0.66)    -0.43, 2.14   - - 0.45 (.35)    -0.23, 1.14    
SDT16: Involvement  -2.56** (1.03)  -4.59, -0.53     -0.64 (0.88)   -2.38, 1.09    -0.69* (0.23)  
 -1.15, -0.24   -0.39 (0.37)  -1.12, 0.33   
SDT17. Encourage social 
support seeking  0.08 (0.67)   -1.24, 1.40     0.23 (0.60)   -0.94, 1.40     0.12 (0.24)  -0.34, 0.58  -0.06 (0.32)    -0.70, 0.57   
SDT18: Group co -
operation  - - -1.52* (0.66)    
 
 -2.82, -0.22  0.58* (0.24)     
 0.12, 1.05  0.17 (0.36)    -0.55, 0.88     
 
 
Notes: Only strategies implemented in five or more studies were included in the analysis for all outcomes. For Relatedness, o nly the primary strategies 
loading onto Relatedness (see Table 1) were used due to the lower number of studies. * p<.05, ** p<.001  
  
 
38 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Study selection process ( * studies could be excluded for more than one reason).  
 
  Number of records included in quantitative synthesis (meta -analysis): 74  Number of records identified through 
database searching: 4302  Number of additional records identified 
through other sources: 43  
Number of records after duplicates removed: 2496  
Number of records included in qualitative synthesis: 74  N Excluded*:  
Impact on SDT mediators not 
recorded/reported (k=75)  
Not an intervention (k=36)  
Insufficient/no control group (k=51)  
Not reporting primary results (k=10)  
Insufficient data for meta -analysis 
(k=61)  
Insufficient detail to classify techniques 
(k=29)  
Repeat results (k=13)  
Not English language (k=5)  
Not health related ( k=17)  Number of full text articles assessed for 
eligibility: 339  Number of records screened: 2496  Number of records excluded: 2157  
 
39 
  
Figure 2.  Effect sizes and confidence intervals for individual studies (k=26) that measure 
autonomy satisfaction and overall mean.  
 
  -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 672
70
67
65
62
59
53
51
48
46
45
43
42
41
36
33
29
27
22
19
14
8
6
4
3
2
Mean
 
40 
  
Figure 3 . Effect sizes and confidence intervals for individual studies (k=34) that measure 
competence satisfaction and overall mean.  
  -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5 673
72
70
67
59
53
48
47
46
45
43
42
41
36
33
32
31
29
27
26
25
24
22
19
15
14
12
10
8
6
4
3
2
1
Mean
 
41 
  
Figure 4.  Effect sizes and confidence intervals for individual studies (k=19) that measure 
relatedness satisfaction and overall mean.  
  -2 -1.5 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.559
48
46
45
43
42
41
36
33
27
22
19
14
6
4
3
2
1
Mean
 
42 
 
 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5
 
43 
 Figure 5.  Effect sizes and confidence intervals for individual studies (K= 56) that measure 
autonomy satisfa ction  (including study numbers 74, 
73,71,70,69,68,66,65,64,63,62,60,59,58,57,56,55,54,52,51, 50, 
49,48,46,44,43,42,40,38,37,36,35,34,33,32,31,30,29,28,27,26,24,23,22,21,19,16,15,14,11,10,
8,7,5,3,2, Overall Mean)  
  
 
44 
  
Figure 6 . Effect sizes and confidence in tervals for individual studies (k=19) that measure 
autonomy support and overall mean.  
 -1 0 1 2 3 4 574
73
64
61
58
54
48
45
38
35
30
28
20
18
17
13
12
11
1
Mean
