Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology and Health
ISSN: 0887-0446 (Print) 1476-8321 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Preventing alcohol abuse and alcohol-related
problems through community interventions: A
review of evaluation studies
D. M. Gorman & Paul W. Speer
To cite this article:  D. M. Gorman & Paul W. Speer (1996) Preventing alcohol abuse and
alcohol-related problems through community interventions: A review of evaluation studies,
Psychology and Health, 11:1, 95-131, DOI: 10.1080/08870449608401978
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870449608401978
Published online: 19 Dec 2007.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 130
View related articles 

Psychologyand Healrh, 1996, Vol. 11, pp. 95-131 
Reprints available directly from the Publisher 
Photocopying permitted by license only 0 1996 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) 
Amsterdam B.V. Published in The Netherlands 
by Hanvood Academic Publishers GmbH 
Printed in Malaysia. 
PREVENTING ALCOHOL ABUSE AND ALCOHOL- 
RELATED PROBLEMS THROUGH 
COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS: A REVIEW OF 
EVALUATION STUDIES 
D. M. GORMAN 
Center of Alcohol Studies, Rutgers - The State University of New Jersey 
PAUL W. SPEER 
Center for Social and Community Development, Rutgers - The State University of 
New Jersey 
(Received in final form 8 March, 1995) 
In recent years community-based initiatives have emerged as the most widely heralded and promoted alcohol 
and drug abuse prevention strategy in the USA. In this paper we critically review those studies (n = 8) that have 
presented data designed to assess the effectiveness of community-based alcohol abuse prevention programs. The 
majority of these studies report minimal program effects. even over the immediate post-intervention period. 
Their principal limitations appear to be (1) a failure to generate community involvement in the design and 
implementation of program activities and (2) an inability to impact upon community-level processes. Three 
studies recently initiated in the USA are then discussed. These address more directly than previous efforts the 
issue of whether change in systems-level influences can be achieved through community-based interventions, 
while also attempting to broaden the target audience of intervention programs and encouraged greater 
community participation. Among the numerous challenges that remain in the area of alcohol abuse prevention 
research is to develop and implement community-based programs in “high risk” urban settings, where the 
markets for alcohol and other drugs tend to concentrate due to economic conditions. 
KEY WORDS: Alcohol abuse, alcohol-related problems, community interventions. 
Alcohol use and abuse result in considerable morbidity (both physical and psychiatric) 
and mortality in the United States (Secretary of Health for Human Services, 1990). 
Among the adult population, this takes the form of chronic conditions, notably liver 
disease and cirrhosis. In contrast, alcohol use by adolescents is hazardous in the short- 
term since it greatly increases involvement in other “risky” or “problem behaviors” 
such reckless driving, violent and self-destructive acts, and sexual intercourse (and 
hence risk of HIV infection and pregnancy) (US Department of Education, 1993). 
Despite recent reductions in the USA, automobile accidents remain the leading cause 
of death among youth (Hingson, Howland, and Levenson, 1988). Early initiation into 
alcohol use is also hazardous as it is associated with later progression to illicit 
Correspondence to: D. M. Gorman, Center of Alcohol Studies, Rutgers - The State University of New Jersey, 
Smithers Hall, Busch Campus, Piscataway, NJ 08855 Telephone: (908) 445-2190 FAX: (908) 445-3500. 
Preparation of this chapter was supported by a grant to D.M. Gorman from the Alcohol Education and Research 
Council and the Portman Group of Great Britain, and by grant number 5H86SP04095 from the Center of Substance 
Abuse Prevention to Paul W. Speer. 
95 
96 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
substances such as marijuana and cocaine (Kandel, 1975; Kandel and Yamaguchi, 
1993). Given the role that alcohol plays in adolescent morbidity and mortality, it is 
not surprising that among the objectives set for the year 2000 by the US Public Health 
Service is a reduction in the use of alcohol by young people (US Public Health Service, 
1991.)' 
Most efforts within the USA to prevent alcohol use and related problems among 
adolescents attempt to reduce demand. The strategy most frequently used in these 
efforts is the school-based program, organized around a set curriculum (Moskowitz, 
1989). Developments in cumcula over the past thirty years can be described in terms 
of three phases in which specific theoretical models have dominated research and 
practice (Botvin, 1990; Perry and Kelder, 1992). During the first phase (early-1960s 
to early 1970s), drug use was considered to be the result of ignorance on the part of 
adolescents, and information-based cumcula were developed. These were concerned 
primarily with imparting factual information about the effects of drugs. Evaluations 
of these programs were, for the most part, concerned with assessing their impact on 
knowledge and attitudes rather than behavior, and showed that they were at best 
ineffective and at worst detrimental (Kinder, Pape and Walfish, 1980; Randall and 
Wong, 1976). During the second phase, (early-1970s to early-l980s), drug use among 
adolescents was considered to be the result of low self-esteem, poor decision-making 
skills and confused value systems, and afJective cumcula, most of which made no 
actual reference to drug use, were dominant. A series of reviews indicated that these 
programs had little influence on either drug use or hypothesized intervening variables 
such as self-esteem (Botvin, 1990; Moskowitz, 1989). The social influence model - of 
which there are two basic types (resisrance skills training and life skills training) - has 
dominated the third phase of drug abuse prevention (early- 1980s to present). Resistance 
skills training cumcula (e.g., EIlickson and Bell, 1990) focus on teaching adolescents 
the skills considered necessary to identify and resist the social pressures to use drugs, 
which are thought to emanate primarily from the media and from peers. Life skills 
training curricula (e.g., Botvin, Baker, Dusenbury, Tortu and Botvin, 1990) teach 
resistance skills also, but include addition components that focus on more general 
social skills such as anxiety management and assertiveness. Proponents of these 
approaches argue that available research shows them to be effective in reducing 
alcohol, cigarette and illicit drug use among adolescents (e.g., Botvin, 1990; Perry and 
Kelder, 1992). More recently, however, critics have argued that the effectiveness of 
social influence programs has been overstated (Brown and Horowitz, 1993; Gerstein 
and Green, 1993; Gorman, 1992a, 1992b, 1994, in press; Lamarine, 1993). In addition, 
others have observed that prevention programs that are premised on "individual-only 
'It should be noted that as far as adults are concerned, the issue of prevention is somewhat complex. For while 
there is considerable evidence showing that a high proportion of hospital admissions and primary care patients 
report alcohol-related problems (Coulehan, Zcttler-SegaI, Block, McCIelland and Schulberg, 1987; Potamianos, 
Goman, Duffy and Peters, 1988). case-control and cohort studies suggest that alcohol use may in fact reduce risk 
of some health problems such as coronary heart disease (Turner. Bennett and Hernandez. 1981). Both abstainers 
and heavy drinkers have higher rates of mortality and morbidity, suggesting that moderate dnnking has a protective 
effect. However. the question remains as to how this U-shaped curve can be explained, and in particular the need 
to account for the prior health status of abstainers who may simply have "drifted from heavy drinking to non- 
drinking due to accumulating health problems. Empirical evidence concerning this issue remains inconclusive (De 
Labry er al., 1992; Jackson. Scragg and Beaglehole, 1991; Shaper, 1990 Tracy, Gorman and Leventhal, 1992). 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 97 
models” are inherently limited, and therefore unlikely to lead to substantial long-term 
changes in substance use and abuse (Holder, 1992; Leventhal and Keeshan, 1993). 
Within the field of alcohol abuse prevention research, those who employ strategies 
that attempt to move beyond influencing the behavior of individuals to influencing 
community or societal level factors tend to be more concerned with limiting the supply 
of alcohol to adolescents than with reducing demand. Policy changes that impact upon 
supply and accessibility, such as the increase in the legal drinking age that occurred 
in the United States in the 1980s, have been shown to have considerable impact on 
alcohol-related deaths and injuries among adolescents (Hingson et af., 1988; Moskowitz, 
1989). However, despite such broad changes limiting accessibility, other national 
trends (such as lower prices and greater outlet densities) have served to increase supply 
and availability (Holder, 1993a). and research shows that young people can obtain 
alcohol from retail outlets with relative ease (O’Malley, Gorman and Speer, 1994; 
Perry er af., 1993; Preusser and Williams, 1992; Wagenaar and Wolfson, 1994). Thus, 
at both a national and a local level, much remains to be done to limit youth accessibility 
to alcohol. 
In recent years, and perhaps in response to the acknowledged limitations of school- 
based efforts, community-based initiatives have emerged as the most widely heralded 
and promoted alcohol and drug abuse prevention strategy in the USA (Hyndman and 
Giesbrecht, 1993; Klitzner, 1993). In this review we discuss existing published 
accounts of community-based alcohol abuse prevention programs. In selecting studies, 
three inclusion criteria were established. First, only evaluations of projects concerned 
with alcohol abuse prevention were reviewed. Evaluations of programs concerned with 
the prevention of both alcohol abuse and illicit drug use were included, but those 
concerned just with the latter were excluded (e.g., Lurigio and Davis, 1992). 
Second, only programs which included components designed to affect the knowledge, 
attitudes and/or behavior of the general populace of a community were reviewed. 
Interventions which focused exclusively on community agents or gatekeepers (such as 
health care and social work professionals, or elected officials), and in which outcome 
was not assessed in terms of their impact upon the broader community, were excluded 
(e.g., Gorman, Werner, Jacobs and Duffy, 1990; Manger, Hawkins, Haggerty, and 
Catalano, 1992). Third, only reports dealing with the design, implementation and 
evaluation of a specific prevention program were included. Overviews of more general 
privately and publicly funded prevention initiatives, such as the Robert Wood Johnson 
Fighting Back project (Klitzner, 1993) or the Center for Substance Abuse Prevention 
Community Partnership Program (Cook and Roehl, 1993), were excluded. Accounts 
concerned primarily with describing the level of existing prevention efforts within a 
community (e.g., Rootman and Moser, 1984) or those that provided detailed 
descriptions of the development of new program initiatives (e.g., Carlson, 1990; 
Wallack, 1984), but which did not involve a controlled evaluation or time-series 
analysis to access program effectiveness, were also excluded. 
Using the above criteria, we identified eight published accounts detailing evaluations 
of community-based alcohol use/abuse prevention programs. These were as follows: 
(I) the California “Winners” program (Wallack and Barrows, 1982/1983); (2) the 
Midwestern Prevention Project (Pentz, 1986; 1993; Pentz, Cormack, Flay, Hansen, and 
Johnson. 1986; Pentz et al., 1989a; 1989b; Johnson er af., 1990); (3) the Community 
Action Project on Alcohol (Casswell and Gilmore, 1989; Casswell and Stewart, 1989; 
Casswell, Gilmore, Maguire, and Ransom, 1989; Casswell, Ranson and Gilmore 1990); 
98 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
(4) the Vermont Self-regulation Training Program (Worden, Flynn, Memll, Waller, 
and Haugh, 1989); (5) the Rhode Island Community Alcohol Abuse Injury Prevention 
Project (Harrington, Putnam, Waters and Colt, 1989; Putnam. 1990; Putnam, Rockett, 
and Campbell, 1993; Stout, 1992; Stout et af., 1993); (6) the Tri-community Prevention 
Project (Giesbretcht and Douglas, 1990; Giesbretcht, Pranovi, and Wood, 1990; 
Giesbretcht and Pederson, 1992), (7) the Thunder Bay Project (Douglas, 1990; 
Gliksman, Douglas, Thomson, Moffatt, Smythe, and Caverson, 1990; Murray and 
Douglas, 1988), and (8) the Boys and Girls Club of America’s Stay SMART Program 
(St. Pierre, Kaltreider, Mark, and Aikin, 1992). 
In reviewing these studies, we employed a modified version of the format used by 
Shea and Basch (1990a; 1990b) in their discussion of five major community-based 
cardiovascular disease prevention programs. This entails assessing projects along the 
following dimensions: (1) rationale and design, (2) theoretical framework, (3) 
intervention strategies, (4) planning process, (5) evaluation methods, and (6) results. 
Summaries of the eight studies reviewed are contained in Table 1. In addition to 
these eight detailed evaluations of community-based programs, published accounts are 
available describing three large-scale projects recently commenced in the USA - the 
Prevention Research Center Study (Holder, 1993b; Schatz, Schember, Parsons, 
Rodrigeuz, Young, and Holder, 1993), Project Northland (Perry et al., 1993), and 
Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol (Wagenaar and Wolfson, 1993). 
These accounts describe the rationale and design, theoretical framework, intervention 
strategies, planning process, and evaluation methods used in the projects, but not 
outcome data. These three projects are reviewed briefly. 
THE CALIFORNIA “WINNERS” ALCOHOL PROGRAM 
(1) Rationale and Design 
The California “Winners” Alcohol Program (CWAP) was conducted in three 
communities in California over a 3-year period beginning in 1977. One community (the 
“experimental”) received both a mass media and community program, a second 
received only the media program, and a third received no intervention (the “comparison”). 
Following the Stanford Heart Disease Prevention Program, the community component 
was designed to reinforce and increase the potency of the media program in the 
experimental site. 
The stated goal of the CWAP was to prevent individuals from developing drinking 
behavior “ ... that is detrimental to their health, or causes family, social, or economic 
problems, or creates a financial burden upon the government ...” (Wallack and Barrows, 
1982/83, p. 309). To this end, the program sought to increase awareness of information 
regarding alcohol, change attitudes regarding alcohol use, alter behavior identified as 
leading to alcohol-related problems, and reduce alcohol-related problems such as liver 
cirrhosis, drunk-driving, and arrests for public intoxication. Such change was sought 
at both the individual and community level. 
Changing awareness and attitudes were considered to be short-term objectives of the 
program. Changing behavior was initially considered a long-term objective, but was 
entirely abandoned as a program goal in the final year of the project. 
Table 1 Summary of Community-based Alcohol Use Prevention Programs 
Rationale 
Study and design 
California “Winners” To kess the 
Project (Wallack combined effects 
& Barrows, of a community 
I982/83) program and mass 
media intervention 
on program awareness, 
knowledge, attitudes, 
and behavior Principal 
theoretical 
franiework 
Social marketing, 
and values-behavior 
model bttervetitioti Platining 
strategies process 
Mass media, Little coordination 
community meetings of program 
and school curriculum components Evaluation 
methods 
Household surveys 
conducted in three 
communities (community 
intervention, mass media, 
comparison) at three 
points in time 
8 Summary of Results. The intervention led to increased awareness of the program and some gain in knowlege, but had no effect on attitudes or behavior. 
Midwestern Prevention To reduce alcohol use Social learning theory Skills-based school 10-stage Surveys conducted 
Project (Pentz et al., through a school-based curriculum, mass implementation with students who 
I989a) curriculum and supportive media, parent program, process received the program 
parent, media, community community organization, (intervention group) 
and policy components and those who did not 
(comparison group) and policy initiatives 
Summary of Results. A greater proportion of the comparison group reported alcohol use at one-year follow-up. However, this difference was not maintained at the three-year 
follow-up. 
Community Action 
Project (Casswell 
& Gilmore, 1989) To reinforce moderate Education for critical Community Coordination of Random surveys 
drinking and influence consciousness organization and the project through conducted at two 
policies related to mass media regular meetings of points in time in 
alcohol availability research team and three communities 
through community community organizers (community organizing 
organizing and the plus mass media, mass 
mass media media only, and 
comparison) 
Summary of Results. The interventions had limited impact, and operated primarily in inhibiting the trend toward greater liberalization of attitudes toward alcohol evident in 
the comparison community. 
3 
Cont. 
Study Rationale 
and desinn Principal 
theoretical 
framework biervention 
stratepies Planning nrocess Evalrtation 
methods 
Vermont Self- 
regulation Project 
(Worden et al., 1989) To reduce alcohol- Skill training with Drink calculators Recruiting all licensed surveys of 
impaired driving community support distributed through outlets and training of drivers in three 
communities (SRT. through self- licensed outlets 
regulation training (SRT) PSAs. comparison) their staff 
Summary of Results. Drinking behavior remained the same in all three communities. Fewer subjects with BACs above the legal limit in the SRT community at posttest than 
in the other communities. 
Rhode Island 
Community Project 
(Putnam et al.. 1993) To assess the effect of Enabling theory Server and police Ad hoc - intervention 
a program targeting training. political was to be based on 
knowledge, attitudes support, and needs assessment which 
and behavior of mass media was not conducted 
liquor servers and 
police officers on a 
community’s alcohol- 
related problems Time-series data 
pertaining to arrest rates 
and emergency room injury rates collected 
in three communities 
(one intervention and 
two comparisons) 
Summary of Results. Alcohol-related arrests increased while alcohol-related emergency room visits decreased. However, multiple rival hypotheses compete with claims that 
the program was responsible for these effects. 
Tri-community Targeted heavy Distribution of 
Mass media, Insufficient attention Household surveys 
Prevention Project drinkers to reduce consumption model community forums, given to involving conducted at two points 
(Giesbrecht average consumption individual counseling the community in he and eight years of 
et al., 1990) community-wide and sewer training time-series data 
pertaining to alcohol 
sales and hospital 
heahmnt calked from 
three communities 
(intervention and two 
comparisons) 
Summary of Results. Individuals in the counseling program reduced their alcohol consumption, but no noticeable decline in drinking was found in the community. 
Cont. 
Principal 
framework strategies process methods Rationale theoretical Intervenrion Planning Evalitation 
and design ______.___-- ~____ Strtdv 
Thunder Bay To assess the effects Distribution of Mass media and Project designed by RetesyPosttest household 
Project (Gliksman of reducing alcohol consumption model change in researchers and city survey conducted in two 
et al.. 1990) availability and social marketing municipal policies officials, with communities (intervention ___. 
community and comparison) 
involvement 
in the policy initiatives 
Summary of Results. Awareness and behavioral intentions moved in the direction targeted by the program, but alcohol consumption was unchanged. 
Boys & Girls To reduce drug use Social learning theory Life skills training Recruited only clubs 
Clubs Stay SMART through a skills- curriculum and with organizational 
Program (St. Pierre based curriculum booster sessions structure capable of 
et al., 1992) delivered in a youth sustaining the project 
club setting Pretest/posttest surveys 
of youth in three types of 
study mditions (pmgram 
only, program plus 
booster sessions, and 
comparison) 
Summary of Results. Small effects in changing alcohol-related behavior and small effects in perceived benefits of alcohol consumption. 
102 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The CWAP was not driven by a single, clearly articulated theoretical framework. The 
decision to incorporate a community component appears to have been guided 
principally by the model employed in the Stanford Five City Project, in which 
community organization was used to create an environment receptive to educational 
inputs from the mass media (Shea and Basch, 1990a). 
As for mass media component, Wallack and Barrows state that it “was hard to get 
a concrete grasp of [its] theoretical underpinnings” (Wallack and Barrows, 1982/83, 
p. 312). They go on to note that it employed elements of social marketing, while also 
embracing a values-behavior model. The latter they define as an affectively oriented 
approach which conceptualizes “the problem of drug abuse as one of problematic 
communication between people” (Wallack and Barrows, 1982/83, p. 3 13). D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The mass media component, which was implemented in both the experimental and 
media sites, was comprised of television commercials, radio spots, and billboard 
designs. In the first year, the target group was males aged 18-35 years. Other groups 
were targeted later - e.g., females aged 2540 years and those of Spanish heritage in 
the second year of the project, and teenagers in the third year. It was anticipated that, 
during the first year, 90% of the target audience would be exposed to the media 
messages an average of 35 times. However, the California Wine Institute objected to 
one of the television commercials, and the Governor subsequently ordered that two be 
replaced and a third altered. The delay resulted in an established 40% reduction in 
exposure to the media component of the program. 
The nature and role of the community component, which was delivered only in the 
experimental site, changed over the course of the project. Initially, it was conducted 
out of storefront-type facilities, and was primarily focussed on organizing a series of 
four two-hour educational meetings, each occurring in a different setting (e.g., school, 
church, youth club, and workplace). The objective of these meetings was “... to get 
participants to look at their own drinking behavior, to assess its potential harmfulness, 
and to provide the individual with the skills necessary to alter personal drinking 
practices” (Barrows and Wallack, 1982/83, p. 314). Prior to this series of meetings, 
a 30-40 minute introductory session was held, designed to recruit agencies to host the 
educational events. In the first year of the project, more than 8,000 people attended 
the introductory session while some 6,000 attended at least one of the 2-hour meetings. 
A second strategy used in the community program was the development and 
implementation of a school-based curriculum, dealing with choice-making in risk- 
taking situations for grades 3,4,7 and 10. Over the first two years of the study, 152 
teachers attended workshops to train in the use of the curriculum. 
Both the community meetings and the school component were dropped in the final 
year of the project, and the program shifted to purely promotional and publicity 
activities (e.g.. distributing booklets, balloons, and bumper stickers), and no attempt 
was made to alter drinking behavior. These activities were estimated to reached more 
than 190,000 people. 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 103 
(4) Planning Process 
As noted above there were two components to the CWAP intervention in the 
experimental site - mass media and community-education - with the latter designed to 
reinforce the former. However, contracts for each component were awarded to two 
different organizations, and became totally distinct in theoretical orientation (see 
above) and quite separate in function. As a result, there was very little connection 
between the two components, and Wallack and Barrows (1982/83) report that 
implementation of the program was a major problem. 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
Measurements were taken in each community at baseline, 6-month and 3-year follow- 
up. At each measurement point, a random sample was drawn of a different cross-section 
of approximately 500 adults (18-59 years) and 100 adolescents (12-17 years) from 
each of the three sites. 
Household surveys (approximately 45-60 minutes long) were used to collect two 
main types of data. The first concerned the recognition, recall and comprehension of 
program themes. The second, concerned the impact of the program in terms of 
knowledge of social, physical, administrative and legal facts concerning alcohol use, 
attitudes such as tolerance of drunkenness, concern about drinking and alcohol-related 
problems in the community and about one’s own drinking, awareness of alcohol- 
related messages in the environment from program, non-program and interpersonal 
sources, and behavior measured in terms of amount and pattern of alcohol consumption 
and the occurrence of alcohol-related problems. 
The analyses presented by Wallack and Barrows (1982/83) were based mainly on 
data collected at baseline and final follow-up from the experimental community and 
the comparison community. The unit of analysis was the community and not the 
individual. 
(6) Results 
Overall, recognition, recall, and comprehension of the program messages increased 
substantially over the course of the study in the experimental site, while remaining 
essentially unchanged in the comparison site. For example, about 84% of adolescents 
and 70% of adults in the experimental community correctly interpreted the television 
commercials at final follow-up, compared with 14% and lo%, respectively, in the 
comparison community. 
Changes in the outcome variables were more modest. Adults in the experimental 
community showed a significant increase from baseline to final follow-up in two of 
the knowledge categories and one of the attitude categories, while adolescents showed 
improvement on just one of the knowledge categories. Adults and adolescents in the 
comparison community showed no change in either knowledge or attitude scores over 
the course of the study. There was no change in the level of concern about drinking 
in the community among adults in the experimental site, while for adolescents there 
was a decline in the experimental site and an increase in the comparison site. There 
were no significant differences between communities in the amount of change over 
time in either the adult or adolescent sample in terms of concern about their own 
104 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
drinking. The program had a positive effect on awareness of messages from program 
sources and mixed effects on awareness of messages from non-program and 
interpersonal sources. No changes were found in any of the measures of behavior. 
Wallack and Barrows (1982/83) attribute the minimal impact of the CWAP to its 
foundation in unsubstantiated theoretical models of behavior change, its reliance on 
the mass media as the primary mode of intervention, its use of a working-definition 
of alcohol-related problems as individual-level phenomena, and the organizational 
difficulties that arose from the separation of the program components. They observe 
that their principal findings of increased awareness, some gain in knowledge. and no 
attitude or behavior change were “consistent with a myriad of other mass media 
programs and prevention efforts in general” (Wallack and Barrows, 1982/83, p. 331). 
THE MIDWESTERN PREVENTION PROJECT 
(1) Rationale and Design 
Begun in 1984, the Midwest Prevention Project (MPP) was a 6 year study, the principle 
component of which was a skills training program targeted at youth in Kansas City. 
Specifically, the rationale for the project drew on research indicating that youth lack 
the social and communication skills necessary to resist the pervasive use of drugs in 
their environments. The principal component of the MPP through which resistance 
skills were taught was a school-based curriculum. Other program components targeted 
additional environmental influences within the family, media and community in an 
attempt to support the skills learned in the curriculum and establish a community norm 
of non-use of drugs (Pentz et al., 1989a). 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The authors of the reports on the MPP make reference to several theoretical 
orientations. Most of the techniques employed in the school-based component of the 
intervention were derived from cognitive social learning theory (e.g., Bandura, 1977). 
and focused on individual-level or primary group processes such as modeling, 
attributions, self-efficacy, and expectancies (Johnson et al, 1990; Pentz, 1993). 
Reference is also made to gateway theories of substance abuse (e.g., Kandel, 1975; 
Kandel and Yamaguchi, 1993) which describe the process whereby use of substances 
such as marijuana and cocaine typically follow use of cigarettes and alcohol (Johnson 
et al., 1990; Pentz et al., 1989a; Pentz, 1993). Additionally, mention is made in the 
descriptions of the MPP of “systems” or “environmental” theories (e.g., Rogers, 1983; 
Rothman, Erlich, and Teresa, 1981), concerning factors such as community norms, 
organizational development, and information diffusion (Pentz, 1986; 1993). 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The MPP comprised five components, introduced sequentially in the intervention sites 
- a mass media component, a school-based resistance skills training curriculum, a 
parent program, community organization involving training of city leaders in the 
planning and implementation of prevention efforts, and a health policy change 
component designed to initiate change in local ordinances regulating the availability 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 105 
of alcohol and tobacco products. Influences operating within the school (notably peer 
group pressure) were considered the most proximal in the sequence leading to drug 
use initiation (Pentz, 1986), and therefore the school-based curriculum and mass media 
component were introduced first in the intervention sites, followed by the other three 
components at 6- to 12-month intervals. The school, family, and media components 
were concerned essentially with demand reduction, while the community organizing 
and policy change components were considered supply reduction strategies (Pentz, 
1993). 
Although conceived as a comprehensive multicomponent intervention, only limited 
aspects of the MPP have been evaluated to date. Pentz et al. (1989a) report data 
pertaining to the school, family and media components. As implemented, the school- 
based component involved 10 classroom sessions taught in grade six or seven, with 
a 5-session booster program the following year. The training was dedicated to the 
development of drug-specific resistance skills, and addressed the psychosocial 
consequences of drug use, beliefs about drug use prevalence, recognition of adult, 
media and community influences supportive of drug use, peer and environmental 
pressures, assertiveness training and problem solving in difficult situations. Skills were 
taught through modeling, role-playing, Socratic discussion with feedback, and peer 
reinforcement. The parent component was orientated around six homework assignments 
which involved interviewing family members about techniques in avoiding alcohol and 
drug use and family methods used to counteract media and community influences. The 
mass media component included 16 television, 10 radio and 30 print media “events”. 
However, this component of the program was not experimentally manipulated, in that 
the comparison communities also received the media messages. These interventions 
were delivered over a period of 17 months. 
Reporting data on 3-year follow-up, Johnson et al. (1990) described two additional 
components - a parent organization program concerned with reviewing school 
prevention policy and training parents in communication skills, and initial training of 
community leaders in an attempt to establish a prevention task force. As with the media 
component, the community leader training was made available in both the intervention 
and comparison communities, and no details are given concerning the level of 
participation in the parent training. 
(4) Planning Process 
The planning process was unique in its synthesis of participation, both in terms of 
resources and financial support, from the private business sector of the community, 
a non-profit foundation, and a federal agency. A key role in the initiation of the project 
was played by a wealthy philanthropist in the community, who utilized his business 
and his private foundation to support this effort (Pentz et al., 1986). 
Implementation of the program followed a detailed 10-stage model, involving 
identification of the target population, conceptualization of the community unit, 
recruitment and training of community leaders, the formation of a coordinating 
structure, and standardization of the intervention program (Pentz. 1986). Teachers 
involved in the school program were trained by project staff in the use of the skills- 
based techniques and. once underway, implementation was monitored by the research 
team and additional booster training sessions were provided to ensure continued 
interest in the program and fidelity to the curriculum (Pentz, 1986; 1993). 
106 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
Baseline data were drawn from approximately one-third of sixth and seventh grade 
students in the 50 public middlehigh schools operating in the Kansas City area at the 
outset of the study (1984/1985). The entire sixth and seventh grade cohorts in 16 
schools were included, along with a 25% sample of sixth and seventh grade students 
from 34 other schools (sampled randomly by classroom). 
By 1985/1986, when the intervention program commenced, six of the schools were 
no longer in operation and two failed to provide adequate baseline data. The remaining 
42 schools formed the study sample. Only eight of these *were randomly assigned to 
study conditions. In the case of the other 34, allocation was based on administrator 
flexibility, with 20 rescheduling their existing activities and being assigned to the 
intervention group and 14 not rescheduling and being assigned to the comparison 
group. The baseline sample comprised some 5,000 students, 30% of whom were 
tracked individually over the course of the study and 70% of whom were tracked by 
grade cohort (thus, including new intake students who may not have received the 
intervention). Of the 1,607 tracked individually, 84% were retested at the 3-year 
follow-up (Johnson et al., 1990). A 133-item questionnaire, administered in the 
classroom, was used to assess demographic and psychosocial factors, and variables 
related to drug use. D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
(6) Results 
Pentz et al. (1989a). reporting data at one-year follow-up, concluded that: “The 
increase in proportion of students reporting use was significantly higher in the control 
than in the program condition for all measures of drug use” (Pentz et al., 1989a, p. 
3264). The figures presented showed that at baseline about 7% of subjects in each 
group reported use of alcohol on two or more occasions during the preceding month, 
whereas by one-year follow-up 11% of the intervention group and just over 16 % of 
the comparison group reported such use. However, this initial difference between study 
conditions was not maintained at the 3-year follow-up. Data from the 30% of the 
sample tracked individually were reported at this point, and showed that one-third of 
subjects in each group reported having two or more drinks in the past month (Johnson 
et af., 1990). 
Pentz et al. (1989b) report that parents of children in the intervention group were 
significantly less likely to have used alcohol during the past week at one-year follow- 
up compared to those with children in the comparison group (odds ratio = 0.59, P 
<0.05). However, these data were only collected at follow-up and not baseline, and 
so initial equivalence cannot be assumed. In addition, parental data were only available 
from an extremely small subsample of just over 300 parents (recall that the student 
sample was in excess of 5,000). This subsample represent only 49% of those 
approached to take part in the survey, and was over-representative of female and white 
respondents. 
THE COMMUNITY ACTION PROJECT ON ALCOHOL 
(I) Rationale and Design 
The Community Action Project (CAP), commenced in October of 1982, was conducted 
in six provincial cities in New Zealand, and ran for two-and-a-half years. The six cities 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 107 
were matched in terms of demographic characteristics to form two groups of three. One 
city from each group was assigned (non-randomly) to one of the following study 
conditions: mass media plus community organization (the “intensive” condition), mass 
media, and no-intervention comparison. 
The CAP was intended to achieve two objectives - first, to reinforce moderate 
drinking patterns by encouraging a shift to nonalcoholic beverages, and, second, to 
influence local policies concerning the availability and advertising of alcohol. Here the 
measurable objectives of the program were an increase in support of policies regulating 
availability, advertising and price in the target community. 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The reports of the CAP give little indication of the theoretical model upon which it 
is based, although Casswell and Gilmore (1989) observe that it was driven more by 
a concern to initiate change at a policy-level than were previous community-based 
efforts in alcohol abuse prevention (such as the “Winners” program) or health 
promotion in general (such as the Stanford Five City Project). These, they argue, were 
essentially concerned with change at the level of individual behavior. Writings in the 
field of alcohol policy analysis which emphases the need to stimulate discussion of 
policy options are cited in connection with this aspect of the project (e.g., Room, 1984; 
Wallack, 1980). In discussing the community organization component of the CAP, 
Casswell and Stewart (1989) note that this drew upon the approach described by Freire 
(1973), whose “education for critical consciousness” strategy stresses the importance 
of impacting upon the causes of community problems and not simply alleviating the 
symptoms, and works through the building of coalitions rather than the establishment 
of a formal leadership structure. 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The CAP intervention had two components, similar to those employed in the California 
“Winners” Alcohol Program (Wallack and Barrows, 1982/83). The first was a mass 
media program, implemented in both “experimental” conditions. This was designed to 
achieve essentially “individual-level” objectives, notably reinforcing moderate drinking 
among males. The campaign was “emotive” in orientation, rather than simply 
instructive, and modelling of a positive behavior (switching to non-alcoholic drinks) 
was incorporated in the material. A series of television, movie, and radio commercials 
were developed, and broadcast in “bursts”. For example, the television commercials 
were aired roughly one week in three, with four exposures per week. These reached 
an estimated 6040% of the target audience of 15-29 year-old males (Casswell and 
Gilmore, 1989). A secondary goal of the mass media component was to stimulate 
public discussion of policy issues. The agency charged with developing the media 
component was uncomfortable with this aspect of the program from the outset 
(Casswell ef al., 1989). and ultimately just three newspapers advertisements were 
published which directly addressed policy issues. A fourth was refused publication by 
most newspapers. The CAP project staff took advantage of the controversy surrounding 
this decision, along with that which arose when one of the television commercials was 
abruptly withdrawn, to further stimulate debate over policy issues related to alcohol 
use. 
108 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
The second component of the CAP, the community action program, was implemented 
only in the intensive study condition, and was largely directed at policy issues 
regarding the availability and advertising of alcohol. A community organizer was 
recruited and based in an educational institute in each of the intensive intervention 
cities (Casswell et al., 1989). Hisher role was to generate discussion of alcohol policy 
issues in the local media and community in general. Casswell and colleagues reported 
that “the organizers met with variable success in relation to the media” (Casswell et 
af., 1989, p. 521), with the relationship apparently deteriorating over the course of the 
project. In addition to their work with the media, the community organizers attempted 
to establish a local alcohol coordinating committee comprised of treatment and social 
service personnel, with a view to establishing “task-orientated groups” centered on 
specific issues of concern to the community (Casswell and Gilmore, 1989). For 
example, with regard to availability issues, objections were raised to plans to establish 
more outlets or extend the licensing hours of existing establishments. Finally, the 
community organizers were also involved in promoting the availability of nonalcoholic 
drinks, general awareness activities such as public presentations, and initiating server 
training (although the latter was abandoned due to lack of cooperation on the part of 
retail establishments). 
(4) Planning Process 
The CAP project team were aware of the problems with earlier community 
interventions such as the California “Winners” project, and report putting considerable 
effort into integrating the various components of the study. This was done principally 
through meetings involving the community organizers and project and research staff, 
which were designed to ensure that program activities were consistently directed 
toward the community-level objectives that were central to the project (Casswell and 
Gilmore, 1989; Casswell and Stewart, 1989). In addition, since the principal task of 
the community organizers was to initiate change at the community-level, and not at 
the level of the individual drinker, efforts were made to ensure that the administrative 
bases from which they operated were supportive of this objective. For this reason, a 
treatment setting was considered to be an inappropriate base, and instead organizers 
were established in community education settings (Casswell and Stewart, 1989). 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
A quasi-experimental design was used, with data collected from separate baseline and 
follow-up samples in each community. Approximately 600 randomly selected adults 
were interviewed in each site at each assessment point, resulting in a total sample of 
6,372. An interview was developed to measure attitudes toward a range of alcohol 
control policies, as well as alcohol use in general. 
(6) Results 
Principal components analysis of the 58 items from the interview yielded four variables 
pertaining to policy issues. The first three were labeled “controls on advertising”, 
“controls on sales”, and “controls on price”, and in each case analysis of variance 
showed a statistically significant effect of the intervention in both the media and the 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 109 
intensive communities. The cities in these conditions exhibited no change over time, 
while those in the comparison condition showed a decline in support for restrictions 
in all three areas. The fourth variable was comprised of just two items (the sale of 
alcohol in supermarkets and legal drinking age), and analysis of variance showed there 
was a statistically significant increase in the score of the intensive communities over 
time, relative to the comparison communities (Casswell and Gilmore, 1989). 
The principal components analysis also generated four other “project-relevant 
summary variables”. These were labeled “personal controls on drinking” (e.g., 
counting drinks), “pro-intoxication”, “alcohol as harmless”, and “use of alcohol when 
entertaining”. Significant differences between the study conditions, in terms of changes 
from baseline to follow-up, occurred in the case of the second, third and fourth of these 
summary variables. Respondents in the comparison communities became significantly 
more “pro-intoxication’’ while those in the communities that received either of the 
interventions remained unchanged. Respondents in the intensive cities came to view 
alcohol as less harmless and expressed less inclination to use a alcohol when 
entertaining, while those in the media and reference communities remained unchanged 
on both variables. 
One major limitation of the CAP is that there was not initial equivalence between 
the study conditions. On three of the four policy-relevant variables, the media-only 
communities had significantly worse scores at baseline than those in the other 
communities (Casswell er al., 1990). Casswell and her colleagues acknowledge that 
although the program effects reported were statistically significant, they were also 
modest in size and all were within the range of initial differences between the study 
conditions. Thus, overall, the CAP had limited impact, and operated primarily in 
inhibiting the trend evident in the comparison cities toward greater liberalization of 
attitudes towards alcohol. The community organization component added little to the 
media program, impacting on just two of the summary variables (both of which 
operated at the individual-level) that the latter did not. 
THE VERMONT SELF-REGULATION TRAINING PROGRAM 
(I) Rationale and Design 
The Vermont Self-regulation Training (VSRT) Program (Worden, et al., 1989) was 
designed to reduce alcohol-impaired driving in one Vermont community with a target 
population of some 4,000 individuals of legal drinking and driving age. To this end, 
it sought to train drinkers to self-regulate their blood-alcohol levels through use of 
drink-calculators distributed at licensed premises. Public service announcements 
(PSAs) were also used to publicize the program. The intervention community was 
compared to one community that received no intervention and one that received only 
the PSAs. 
(3) Theoretical Framework 
No explicit theoretical model is described by Worden et al. (1989). although the 
experience of direct skills training and the creation of social support within the 
community are cited as factors central to the demonstration component of the program. 
110 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The intervention program involved distributing and demonstrating the use of drink 
calculators in licensed retail liquor outlets in the target community. The calculators 
enabled drinkers to estimate in a simple manner the number of drinks at which 
impairment of their driving skills would commence. Approximately 6,000 calculators 
were distributed throughout the 6-month intervention period. Fifty-three retail 
personnel were trained in the use of devices, and they, in turn, trained other staff. 
In addition to this direct training, use of the calculators was also demonstrated 
through one 60-second and two 30-second PSAs. These were broadcast, on average, 
20 times per week over the 6-month intervention period. D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
(4) Planning Process 
The program was initiated through a series of meetings with community leaders. All 
25 licensed outlets in the target community participated in the project. 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
A quasi-experimental design was used in which the community in receipt of the 
intervention was compared with one that received only the PSA component and one 
that received no intervention. All three communities had high average annual 
automotive fatality rates. 
Measurements were taken at baseline and immediately upon completion of the 
intervention (posttest). At baseline, data were collected from just over 1,300 
individuals (1008 of those asked) through roadside surveys conducted by police 
officers who stopped all drivers at designated locations. Drivers were questioned about 
their usual drinking habits, and asked to estimate the number of drinks per hour needed 
to reach a blood alcohol concentration (BAC) which exceeded the Vermont legal limit 
for driving. A more comprehensive roadside survey was conducted at posttest. Drivers 
were again stopped by police, but on this occasion surveys were conducted by a 
research team. A total of 927 drivers were interviewed (92% of those stopped), using 
a questionnaire similar to that administered at baseline. Of these individuals, 881 (95%) 
also agreed to have their BAC measured. In both surveys, participants were matched 
to study conditions by their community of residence, regardless of the location of the 
interview. 
(6) Results 
Reported drinking patterns were similar across the three study sites at baseline and at 
posttest (at the latter point, just over 20% in each community reported that they usually 
drank three or more drinks during a one hour period). Posttest assessment of BACs 
showed that 0.6% of drivers in the intervention community were above Vermont’s legal 
limit for driving, compared with 4.7% in the PSA community, and 3.0% in the 
comparison community. Exposure to the drink-calculators was also greater in the 
intervention community than in the other two sites. “High risk” individuals in the 
intervention community (defined as young drivers and those who usually dsank three 
or more drinks per occasion) reported greater exposure to the program than “low risk” 
individuals. 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 111 
Worden et al. (1989) acknowledge that interpretation of the generally positive results 
of the study is limited by the posttest-only assessment of BACs, the limited duration 
of the project, and the modest size of the intervention community. 
THE RHODE ISLAND COMMUNITY ALCOHOL ABUSEDNJURY PREVENTION 
PROJECT 
(1) Rationale and Design 
The Rhode Island Community Alcohol Abuseflnjury Prevention Project was described 
by its authors as “...an epidemiologic research project with a prevention component” 
(Putnam et al., 1993, p. 31). It was designed to reduce the level of alcohol-related 
problems in the community by impacting on the behavior of two key “front line” 
occupational groups - servers in licensed premises and police officers. Three Rhode 
Island communities matched in terms of sociodemographic characteristics took part in 
the study. One was randomly allocated to receive an intervention program that involved 
training personnel of liquor establishments and police officers and mobilizing 
community support. The other two communities served as comparison sites. 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The Rhode Island Project applied “enabling theory” to the community level of analysis, 
that is, it was premised on the idea that community agents can act to facilitate and foster 
problem drinking in others much as family and friends are thought to do. Given this 
central premise, the program was designed to change the knowledge, attitudes and 
behavior of community gatekeepers. The two target gatekeeping groups selected were 
servers in licensed premises and law enforcement officers as members of both have 
a legally-defined responsibility to control intoxication, and therefore can be conceived 
of as key regulators of community drinking practices. It was hypothesized that a change 
in the behavior of these groups would lead to a reduction in the amount of drinking 
in high risk situations, which in turn would lead to a decrease in alcohol-related 
problems (most notably, alcohol-related injuries). The theory underlaying the program 
conceived of the community as a system of influence in which the police and servers 
were at the forefront of alcohol-related injury prevention (Putnam, 1990). 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The Rhode Island Project employed three intervention components “ ... consistent with 
the theoretical model of fostering ‘disenabling ’ behaviors among community gatekeepers” 
(Hamngton et al., 1989, p. 461). The first of these was an alcoholic beverages licensee 
component. This entailed both eliciting a written statement from owners and managers 
of establishments endorsing the principles of responsible alcohol service set out in 
Rhode Island laws, and a 5-hour training program for the sales and service personnel 
of establishments designed to teach techniques for identifying and dealing appropriately 
with minors who tried to buy alcohol and patrons who were clearly intoxicated. 
Seventeen off-premise and 80 on-premise establishments were targeted for inclusion. 
All of the former and 79% of the latter had adopted the written policies for responsible 
alcohol service requested by the program staff by the end of the intervention period. 
112 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
In addition, a total of 392 servers were trained (61% of the estimated 640 in the 
community). 
The second component of the project was a training program for police officers, 
designed to increase the enforcement of DWI laws and laws regarding the sale of 
alcohol to minors or visibly intoxicated adults. Police officers were trained to recognize 
intoxicated behavior, measure levels of intoxication, accurately record alcohol 
involvement in the incidents with which they dealt, and informed of their legal liability 
in dealing with intoxicated individuals. The program also provided equipment and 
assistance which enabled increased radar patrols, sobriety checkpoints, and enforcement 
patrols designed to monitor the sales practices of establishments. All members of the 
police force in the intervention site received training. In addition, 47 radar patrols, 73 
sobriety checkpoints, and 11 enforcement patrols occurred over the course of the 
intervention. 
The third program component entailed the mobilization of civic and political leaders 
in support of the project and an attempt to elicit media coverage of program activities. 
The purpose of the latter “ ... was to gain credibility and support for the project, to 
encourage gatekeepers to participate in the project, and to educate the public in the 
dangers involved in drinking in high injury risk situations” (Harrington et af., 1989, 
p. 461). A community coordinator was appointed and given responsibility for 
mobilizing community support, securing the cooperation of community leaders, servers 
and police officers, and helping to train gatekeepers to practice “disenabling” responses 
in dealing with intoxicated individuals. 
Program components were phased in over time. Sobriety checkpoints, police training 
and technical assistance, and Community mobilization commenced in September 1986, 
server training in March 1987, and police radar patrols in June 1987. The program was 
in place for 30 months, continuing into 1988. 
(4) Planning Process 
Putnam (1990) makes a number of observations concerning the general planning and 
design of the Rhode Island Project. First, because the funding of the project made no 
provision for a planning phase there was always an impression within the community 
that it was behind schedule and ad hoc in nature. Second, although it was intended 
at the outset of the project that baseline findings be used to develop and target the 
interventions, time constraints meant that this did not generally occur. Third, premises 
for the community organizer were provided by the major’s office, and although this 
had some benefits, it also increased the vulnerability of the organizer to co-optation 
by community interest groups and therefore limited the effectiveness of the program. 
Finally, data collection proved to be labor intensive, time consuming and expensive, 
and at times the perception within the community and among project staff was that 
evaluation was being emphasized at the expense of intervention. 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
The project began in October 1984. Baseline data were collected over a period of 18 
months, following which one of the three communities was selected at random to 
receive the intervention. Two types of surveillance data were collected continually over 
the study period - hospital emergency room statistics pertaining to alcohol-related 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 113 
injuries and police records pertaining to arrests and accidents requiring a police 
presence. 
(6) Results 
Arrest rates in the intervention community increased following the introduction of the 
program (with the exception of assault arrest rates, which were unchanged), but 
remained constant in the comparison communities (Putnam er af., 1993; Stout, 1992). 
The overall increase was 9% (1 1 % in the case of alcohol-related arrests, 4% for DWI, 
and as much as 27% in the case of alcohol-related assaults). In the intervention 
community, emergency room injury visits rates declined by 9% overall. There was a 
21% decrease in the assault injury rate, a 10% decline in the motor vehicle crash injury 
rate, and a 24% drop in the head injury rate, compared with a 4% increase, 12% 
increase and 3% decrease, respectively, in the combined comparison communities. 
Putnam er al. (1993) observed that the increase in arrest rates may be due to 
improved enforcement, and therefore represent a program effect. However, they note 
that this change might also result from improved reporting of events (police officers 
were trained as part of the intervention program to be more accurate in recording the 
role of alcohol in accidents), a greater propensity on the part of police to make arrests, 
and/or an increase in crime. As to the decreases in the emergency room injury rates, 
they conclude that these were probably genuine program effects, as they were specific 
to injury-related visits and were not evident in categories of emergency room visits 
not targeted by the program. 
The authors of the various reports from the Rhode Island Project note a number of 
limitations of the time-series data used in the study. First, the small number of 
communities and data points (three and four, respectively) made statistical analyses 
very difficult (Putnam, 1990). Second, the number of events per year in some outcome 
categories (e.g., alcohol-related crashes involving severe or fatal injury) was so small 
that it was difficult to assess the significance of any change over time (Stout, 1992). 
Third, both data sets suffered from under-reporting of the role of alcohol in accidents, 
due to concerns over such issues as the protection of human subjects (Putnam, 1990; 
Putnam et al., 1993; Stout, 1992). Fourth, difficulties arose in excluding non-residents 
of the communities from police and hospital statistics, thereby making it difficult to 
assess the impact of the program on the target audience (Putnam et al., 1993). Finally, 
there were difficulties in distinguishing program effects from other naturally occurring 
events in the intervention community (Stout, 1992; Stout el af. 1993). 
THE TRI-COMMUNITY PREVENTION PROJECT 
(I) Rationale and Design 
The Tri-community Prevention Project (TCPP) was conducted in three southern 
Ontario communities, with populations of between 8,000 and 12,000. One community 
received the intervention program, and two acted as comparisons. The goal of the 
project was to reduce overall average alcohol consumption within the intervention 
community by changing the drinking habits of the heaviest drinkers. 
114 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The TCPP intervention was designed to test the distribution of consumption model, 
originally developed by Ledermann (1956). This model is complex, and has been the 
subject of considerable debate within the field of alcohol research (see Duffy, 1986). 
For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that according to the distribution of 
consumption model there is a fixed relationship between a community’s average level 
of alcohol consumption and the proportion of heavy drinkers within that community. 
According to Geisbrecht and Pederson (1992), this relationship suggests two complementary 
approaches to prevention - the first involving a decrease in aggregate consumption and 
hence a reducti0n.h the proportion of heavy drinkers in the community, and the second 
involving altering the behavior of heavy drinkers and hence moving the entire 
community to the lower end of the consumption curve. Each approach suggests a 
distinct target audience and a distinct strategy - drinkers in general and a “mass” (or 
“universal”) strategy in the case of the former, and heavy drinkers and a “high-risk” 
(or “targeted”) strategy in the case of the latter. The TCPP employed the high-risk 
approach, attempting to impact on the overall level of alcohol consumption within the 
community through an intervention designed to reduce the proportion of heavy 
consumers. D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The intervention was targeted primarily at the individual heavy drinker, but also 
contained “community-level” components. It was promoted through the media, door- 
to-door mailings, posters and presentations, and ran for a total of eighteen months. At 
the individual-level, an alcohol educational and counseling program for heavy drinkers 
was established. This comprised seven weekly one-on-one sessions of one-and-a-half 
hours each, and employed behavior modification techniques such as those described 
by G. Alan Marlatt (Marlatt and George, 1984). Over the course of the study, 52 clients 
took part in this program. 
At the community-level, project staff joined local committees, attempted to influence 
local alcohol policies, and developed server intervention programs and training 
workshops. Those targeted for these activities included the mayor, a hospital 
administrator, the medical officer of health, the police chief, members of the media, 
and local professionals and clergy. Attempts at establishing a local advisory committee, 
comprised of such individuals proved unsuccessful. 
(4) Planning Process 
Giesbrecht and Pederson ( 1992) note that while the project was “community-based”, 
it was not developed in consultation with the community and did not arise out of a 
concern articulated by the community. As a result, project staff experienced difficulties 
in gaining the support and commitment of community leaders. Indeed, community 
leaders appear not to have accepted the most basic goal of the program, in that they 
did not consider that alcohol was a problem for the community. Giesbrecht and 
colleagues observe that staff were unable to satisfactorily accommodate and respond 
to the community leaders’ perceptions, as they were deficient in community 
organizational skills. They state that insufficient attention was paid to the community 
development and community mobilization aspects of the project. In addition, the 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 1 I5 
research requirements of the project also constrained the type of responses that staff 
could make to community leaders. For example, baseline data about levels of alcohol 
consumption, which might have been used to demonstrate that alcohol was indeed a 
problem, could not be fed back to community leaders due to the design requirements 
of the study. 
(5) Evaluation Merhods 
A quasi-experimental design was used, with one intervention community and two 
comparisons. To access the effectiveness of the program for heavy drinkers, data 
detailing the drinking habits of clients who took part in the program were collected 
over the period of their attendance. “Community-level’’ data concerning alcohol use 
were collected through two surveys using independent samples, one at baseline and 
one at 2-year follow-up. These data were collected only from males, in order to obtain 
a high proportion of heavy drinkers. About 1,500 respondents were interviewed in each 
site at each measurement point. In addition a time-series analysis, covering a period 
of eight years, was conducted using statistics detailing alcohol sales and hospital 
treatment of alcohol-related problems. 
(6) Results 
Data collected from the education and counselling program clients showed that 54% 
were drinking more than 14 drinks per week before the program compared to 21% at 
the final assessment point. As for its impact at a community-level, the evaluators of 
the TCPP acknowledge that this was extremely limited (Giesbrecht and Douglas, 1990; 
Giesbrecht et al., 1990). Self-reported alcohol consumption by males showed some 
reduction from baseline to follow-up in the intervention community and one of the 
comparison communities, with “somewhat greater change” in the former. The authors 
note, however, that even though this decline was “statistically significant, these results 
represent only modest changes in the overall average annual intake (two drinks per 
week)” (Giesbrecht et al., 19990, p. 170). The time-series data revealed no noticeable 
decline in the intervention community’s alcohol consumption or alcohol-related 
problems during the time that the project was in place, relative to either comparison 
community. 
THE THUNDER BAY PROJECT 
(1) Rationale and Design 
The Thunder Bay Project was a local policy initiative implemented in 1980 by the 
Corporation of the City of Thunder Bay, Ontario, and was aimed at restricting the use 
of alcohol in city-owned parks and recreational facilities (Gliksman er al., 1990). The 
project coupled stricter policies on alcohol availability with a social marketing 
campaign designed to enhance citizen compliance with these policies. Social marketing 
was seen as a key component of this program because the policy changes were 
unenforceable at the community level and required voluntary compliance to be 
effective. The result was a media campaign geared toward educating community 
members about the positive nature of the city’s recreational facilities and the new 
alcohol policies at those facilities. 
116 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The Thunder Bay Project was premised on the idea that alcohol-related problems could 
be reduced through limiting access to alcohol, i.e., the single distribution model (see 
description of the Tri-community Prevention Project for details). Coupled with the 
strategy to reduce alcohol accessibility, techniques of social marketing aimed at 
identifying and meeting the needs of community residents were employed (Murray and 
Douglas, 1988). The social marketing strategy was designed with an educational thrust 
which focused on supporting legislative controls on alcohol availability rather than 
educating citizens about demand reduction generally. D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The intervention targeted the local level rather than a regional or national level because 
large-scale interventions can be politically damaging to supporters who may be 
perceived as dictating or imposing standards or values from above on local 
communities. A local level intervention was expected to have a greater chance of 
success, through social marketing, because citizens could be persuaded to accept such 
a change from local officials rather than regional or national officers. 
The new policy limited the use of alcohol at city-owned recreational facilities. 
Specifically, alcohol was not permitted at some facilities (e.g., parks), limited to special 
occasions requiring a permit at other facilities (e.g., municipally owned community 
centers), and available generally at a limited number of locations (e.g., the clubroom 
of the Curling Club). To promote these restrictions, a one year media campaign was 
initiated in May of 1983. The campaign focused primarily on the positive features of 
recreational facilities and secondarily on alcohol regulation at the facilities. It was 
anticipated that repeated exposure the these positive messages, which were designed 
to appeal to citizens’ sense of community, would have the effect of increasing voluntary 
compliance with the policies (Giiksman et al., 1990). The media campaign took the 
form of six 30-second PSAs aired on a random basis on all local radio stations over 
a 2-month period. In addition, the campaign was initiated by a press conference, and 
interviews were given to members of the print and broadcast media by city personnel 
to explain the new policy. 
(4) Planning Process 
The planning process was operated primarily by program planners from a local research 
foundation and staff members of the city’s department of parks and recreation. The 
actual alcohol policy was developed by an ad hoc committee of city council members, 
community organization members and citizens at large (Douglas, 1990). 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
The research design was quasi-experimental, with data collected from 1,191 individuals. 
The focus of the evaluation was on the ability of the media campaign to reach residents 
and affect their behavior. A pre- and post-intervention survey was distributed to a 
random sample of residents in both the intervention and comparison communities. 
Study participants were selected based on a four-stage probability sample designed to 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 117 
adequately represent all socioeconomic strata in the community and a random sample 
of households and persons within those households. Despite the stringent sampling 
method, some difficulties were found in application such that random selection of 
persons within households was not always achieved. 
The survey instrument measured a number of attitudinal variables, including 
attitudes toward legal control of alcohol, alcohol use in recreational facilities, and 
underage drinking. Behavioral intentions for future use of recreational facilities were 
also assessed, along with attendance at non-alcoholic functions, compliance with the 
new Iaw, and personal consumption patterns. 
(6) Results 
Forty-six percent of subjects in the intervention community reported at follow-up that 
they were aware of the campaign. In addition, statistically significant impacts between 
baseline and follow-up were found for several variables-notably, attitudes toward 
control of alcohol, attitudes toward underage drinking and attitudes toward alcohol use 
in recreational facilities. These findings suggest that social marketing strategies were 
effective for these variables. Furthermore, the proportion of community respondents 
reporting utilization of city recreational facilities increased in the intervention 
community while remaining stable in the control community for several recreational 
facilities. For example, park usage increased 10% among intervention community 
respondents (from 59% of respondents at baseline to 69% of respondents at follow- 
up) while decreasing 0.7% in the control community (from 59.4% to 58.7%). 
Differences were not found between sites for behavioral intentions to use facilities or 
attend facilities that would not be serving alcohol. However, the intervention 
community increased their behavioral intention to comply with alcohol laws between 
baseline and follow-up at a significantly higher rate than the control community. The 
intervention had no impact on alcohol consumption levels, but this was not considered 
a primary objective of the policy or the media campaign (Gliksman et al., 1990). 
THE BOYS AND GIRLS CLUBS OF AMERICA’S STAY SMART PROGRAM 
(I) Rationale and Design 
The Stay SMART Project (St. Pierre et al., 1992) was designed to assess the 
effectiveness of a social influence program delivered, with and without booster 
sessions, to 13 year-olds in a youth club setting. Boys and Girls Clubs in five 
communities received the program, those in five other communities received the 
program and the booster sessions, and four additional clubs served as no-intervention 
comparisons. One community in each group was rural, and all the others were urban. 
(2) Theoretical Framework 
The Stay SMART program was designed in accordance with the Life Skills Training 
Program developed by Botvin (1990). This is based on the social influence model of 
prevention, which has its origins in social learning theory (Bandura, 1977) and problem 
behavior theory (Jessor and Jessor, 1977). From this perspective, drug use initiation 
is considered to be a behavior learned principally through modeling and reinforcement, 
118 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
and the objective of prevention programs is to impart a range of skills (both specific 
to resisting drug use and more generic in nature) that enable young people to avoid 
or substantially delay their first use of drugs (Botvin, 1990). 
(3) Intervention Strategies 
The Stay SMART Only group received a 9-session intervention program delivered in 
a small group format, and based directly on the Life Skills Training (LST) curriculum 
developed by Botvin (1 990) (three additional sessions designed to prevent sexual 
activity were also included in the intervention). The Stay SMART Plus Booster group 
received exactly the same LST program in the first year of the intervention. along with 
five small group sessions the next year and three sessions in the final year of the project. 
These boosters were designed to reinforce and build upon the skills taught in the initial 
9-session program. Those who attended the booster sessions were also encouraged to 
participate in other prevention activities taking place at the club, such as assisting in 
delivering programs for younger members. 
(4) Planning Process 
Organizational structure was the key factor determining selection of research sites for 
the study. The 10 intervention clubs were selected from a pool of about 150 because 
they were considered to have the organizational structure necessary to implement the 
program and to successfully track and test subjects. The latter criterion was also used 
to select clubs in the comparison condition. 
(5) Evaluation Methods 
A pretest-posttest, quasi-experimental design was used to assess the intervention 
programs. As noted above, allocation to the three study conditions was not random. 
However, clubs in each condition were similar in terms of demographic and 
socioeconomic conditions, and were all located in economically disadvantaged areas 
with high rates of crime and drug use. 
Clubs in the two intervention conditions invited all 13 year-old members to take part 
in the program, until they obtained about 24 acceptances. Participants were considered 
to have received the intervention if they attended nine of the 12 Stay SMART sessions, 
and, in the case of the booster session group, four of the five additional sessions in 
year one and all three of those in year two. 
Assessment of subjects took place at 3-, 15, and 27-month follow-up. In the program 
plus booster sites, the first booster sessions occurred between the 3-month and 15- 
month follow-up, and the second between the 15-month and 27-month follow-up. 
Subjects in all three study conditions were included in the data analyses if they were 
present at all follow-up points. A total of 52 participants met the inclusion criteria in 
the five program-only sites, 54 in the program plus booster session sites, and 55 in 
the four comparison sites. More than 75% of subjects in each group were male. 
Data concerning drug-related knowledge, attitudes and behavior among subjects 
were collected using self-report questionnaires administered by youth club staff. 
Alcohol attitudes were assessed using a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 
“strongly disagree” to “strongly agree”. The items included in the scale focussed on 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 119 
the perceived social benefits of using alcohol (a low score indicating few perceived 
benefits). An alcohol behavior scale was constructed and comprised four items related 
to frequency of use, intention to use in the future, amount usually consumed per 
drinking occasion, and frequency of drinking to intoxication. 
(6) Results 
St. Pierre er al. (1992) reported that the intervention programs was “marginally” 
effective in influencing alcohol-related behavior. Relative to subjects in the comparison 
group clubs, those in the Stay SMART Only and Stay SMART Plus Booster groups 
reported less alcohol-related behavior combined across all three follow-up points. 
However, the size of the differences between the three groups in their mean score on 
the 4-point alcohol behavior scale were small (1.89 - program only, 1.87 - program 
plus booster, and 2.04 - comparison), and did not reach significance at the conventional 
level of p < 0.05. In addition, these mean follow-up scores were barely in excess of 
each group’s baseline score (1.73 - program only, 1.72 - program plus booster, and 
1.95 - comparison). Thus, with or without the program, there was little change over 
the course of the study in the alcohol-related behavior of subjects. 
Subjects in the Stay SMART Plus Booster group came to perceive fewer benefits 
from drinking alcohol over the course of the program, whereas those in the comparison 
group perceived greater social benefits from alcohol use over time. In this case, 
although the differences between groups at follow-up were statistically significant (JJ 
c 0.05 at 15 months and p < 0.01 at 27 months), the actual magnitude of these 
differences was once again small. For example, at 27-month follow-up the mean score 
of the Stay SMART Plus Booster group on the five-point attitude scale was about 1.4, 
while that of the comparison group was about 1.8. 
These minimal differences between study conditions at follow-up must be considered 
in the context of the design limitations of the study. First, the sample was extremely 
small and highly selective - subjects for whom data analyses were performed 
represented 43% of the baseline sample. Although subjects were recruited from “high 
risk environments”, the authors report that their overall use of alcohol and other drugs 
was modest, suggesting that it was “low risk individuals” who selected into the 
programs. In line with this, it was found that those who dropped out of the program 
perceived greater social benefits from using alcohol at baseline than those who 
remained throughout the duration of the study. Second, the program sites were not 
randomly selected, but rather chosen due to their having an organizational capacity 
capable of implementing the program. This raises the possibility that such “well- 
organized” clubs might be atypical of clubs in general, and, indeed, it was found that 
subjects from clubs in the comparison condition reported more alcohol-related behavior 
at baseline than those from clubs in the two intervention conditions. 
OVERVIEW OF STUDIES: CONCEPTUAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL ISSUES 
The majority of the studies reviewed report minimal program effects even over the 
immediate post-intervention period. Included here are the California “Winners” 
Program (Wallack and Barrows, 1982/1983), the Community Action Project (Casswell 
and Gilmore, 1989), the Tri-community Prevention Project (Giesbrecht and Douglas, 
120 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
1990), and the Stay SMART program (St. Pierre er al., 1992). The Midwestern 
Prevention Project reported positive program effects at one-year follow-up (Pentz et 
al., 1989a), but these were not sustained at three years (Johnson et af., 1990). The 
programs reporting most success were those with very specific and circumscribed 
objectives - driving while intoxicated in the case of the Vermont Project (Worden et 
al., 1989) and the Rhode Island Project (Putnam et al., 1993; Stout, 1992), and limiting 
use of alcohol in city-owned parks and recreational facilities in the case of the Thunder 
Bay Project (Gliksman er a!., 1990). The authors of the report on the latter project 
observe that social control policies are generally more successful when implemented 
locally and targeted at a clearly defined segment of the general population (Murray 
and Douglas, 1988; Gliksman et al., 1990). 
The authors of the various reports suggest a number of reasons for their limited 
impact. Here we focus on two that are of fundamental importance - (1) difficulties in 
generating community involvement in the programs and (2) developing interventions 
that truly impact upon community-level processes. We discuss these within the broader 
framework of recent developments within community psychology, in an effort to 
present possible solutions to these problems. Community psychology developed in the 
1960s as psychology’s response to the social problems of the day. Involvement in real 
world settings conceptualized through an ecological framework was the hallmark of 
its approach to social problems (Heller, 1984; Vincent and Tnckett, 1983). Whereas 
the traditional psychological focus on individual and intrapsychic variables in 
understanding and altering human behavior undermines the situational and contextual 
influences in which all behavior is embedded, ecological perspectives add balance to 
psychology’s person-specific orientation. The ecological orientation within community 
psychology places an emphasis on the interactive effects and mutual influence between 
individuals and their environments. Conceptually, community psychology incorporates 
a preventive orientation (rather than a treatment-orientated approach) toward social 
problems (Heller, 1984; Levine and Perkins, 1987). In addition, it has developed the 
concept of “empowerment” as a guiding theoretical framework for the field so as to 
avoid the detrimental impacts associated with many preventive interventions. 
Generating Community Involvement 
A number of the authors of the studies reviewed report that projects were poorly 
organized, with timetables that allowed an insufficient period for planning and 
implementation and little coordination of program components (Putnam, 1990; 
Wallack and Barrows, 1982/83). Where programs were poorly organized, this 
frequently resulted in a failure to engage members of the target communities in the 
design and implementation of the project. Some projects were only minimally 
concerned with involving community residents in developing intervention programs 
(e.g., the Vermont Project). However, for others, this was an integral part of the 
implementation process and community involvement was essential if the program was 
to succeed (e.g.. the Community Action Project and the Thunder Bay Project). 
Unfortunately, as Hyndman and Giesbrecht (1993) observe, even when projects are 
premised on the idea of enabling residents to identify and articulate the problems in 
their communities and to develop and implement the proposed interventions, what 
frequently emerges is a “top down” venture in which project staff and local politicians 
and professionals dominate the decision-making process. In the Rhode Island Project, 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 121 
for example, the point of entry into the community was through “key stakeholders”, 
such as the mayor, police chief, city councilors, liquor licensees, and senior hospital 
staff and administrators, as it was thought that in order to mobilize local support and 
commitment such individuals had first to be recruited as project allies. This, along with 
the fact that the project was designed primarily as a research study, meant that more 
general community ownership was difficult to foster (Putnam, 1990). The authors of 
the reports on the Tri-community Prevention Project also draw attention to the 
problems that arose as a result of the intervention failing to articulate concerns raised 
by the community (Giesbrecht and Pederson, 1992). In this case, not even the 
“community leaders” shared the project staff‘s view that alcohol was a problem for 
the community. 
The “top down” approach to alcohol abuse prevention is indicative of the broader 
philosophical orientation evident in many social policy initiatives which assume that 
social ills can be prevented by helping, educating, socializing, and skill-building 
activities. This assumption is steeped in a tradition of experts “fixing” dependent 
individuals. One result of this orientation has been a professional and cultural 
conceptualization of individuals experiencing social problems as inadequate, dependent 
persons - what Rappaport (1981) has termed the “needs model”. Effects of this model 
on “needy” persons have often been overlooked, particularly iatrogenic effects 
stemming from dependency roles. To solve social problems, the needs model has been 
used by the state and its associated structures to design programs and treatments on 
behalf of dependent persons. Functionally, the needs model has resulted in a role 
relationship where professionals are perceived as knowing how to prevent, help or fix 
social problems better than the persons affected by these problems. 
An alternative conceptualization to the needs model incorporated in traditional 
preventive interventions is an orientation based on “rights”. This orientation views 
individuals experiencing social problems as having the right to deny “helping” 
interventions on their behalf. The “rights” orientation to social problems emphasizes 
freedom, individuality and responsibility while ignoring environmental circumstances 
which limit these ideals. This philosophy came to dominate public policy in the 1980s, 
when social programs were considered the cause rather than the cure of many of 
society’s ills. Indeed, the recent focus on “community” within the prevention field is 
due in part to the conservative zeirgeist of the 1980’s which shifted responsibility away 
from government and onto individuals and the local citizenry (Linney, 1990) thus 
giving a distinct “blame the victim” tenor to some community efforts (Ryan, 1971). 
Rappaport (1981;1987) has argued that the debate between the advocates of the 
“rights” and “needs” approaches fails to recognize that social problems are by their 
very nature paradoxical - although humans have both rights and needs, solutions to 
these issues are often contradictory. Attachment to one or the other of these orientations 
is, therefore, one-sided. In attempting to resolve this issue, Rappaport (198 1; 1987) 
suggests that “empowerment” replace prevention as the theoretical framework for 
community interventions. The foundation of the empowerment orientation is a value 
in individuals and a belief in their inherent competencies and capabilities. The 
empowerment model acknowledges the skills, potentials and humanness in all people; 
it posits poor functioning of social systems as the basis for social problems. As such, 
the empowerment framework addresses a bias in the social sciences which reduces 
system level problems to individual inadequacies, thus blaming the victim for his or 
her own victimization (Ryan, 1971). 
122 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
Empowerment methods focus on individuals enhancing control over their lives. 
Because individuals are unique, enpowerment represents an approach which allows 
diverse solutions to social problems. In contrast, the “needs” and “rights” perspectives, 
historically driven by professionals, experts and paternalistic governmental entities, 
ignore individuality and inherent capacities (Rappaport, 198 1). Underpinning the 
empowerment perspective, therefore, is the idea that competencies exist in all 
individuals. Social problems, in turn, are viewed as the result of social structures which 
limit access to resources and thus inhibit the expression of competencies. Empowerment, 
it follows, views local control rather than centralized decision-making as essential to 
the development and implementation of community interventions. From this perspective, 
the specific components and contents of a program are designed and implemented to 
a considerable extent by local citizens. As will be discussed in the next section, more 
recent prevention projects have attempted to involve community residents more fully 
in the development of intervention initiatives. 
Community-level Interventions 
Commentators on community programs, both within the field of alcohol studies and 
beyond, have raised questions as to the extent to which these truly attempt to impact 
upon community-level influences rather than simply using a community setting to 
implement interventions designed only to change individual behavior (Holder and 
Giesbrecht, 1990; Leventhal, Safer, Clew and Gutman, 1980). As noted in the 
introduction, individual-level interventions focus almost exclusively upon limiting 
demand for alcohol, whereas community-level interventions focus greater attention 
upon restricting the availability or supply of the drug. One of the main reasons why 
individual-level interventions are presented as impacting upon community-level factors 
is that few programs are driven by a clearly articulated conceptual model describing 
what “communities” are and how they function (Duigan, Caswell, and Stewart, 1993; 
Holder and Giesbrecht, 1990). Leventhal et al. (1980) distinguish between three 
potential targets of prevention programs - individuals, groups, and communities - each 
of which has a specific set of behavioral objectives attached to it. An example of an 
individual-level objective is an increase in resistance skills, an example of a group- 
level objective is a positive change in a professions’ beliefs and behavior, and an 
example of a community-level objective is the implementation of a change in policy. 
Along similar lines, Rappaport (1977; 1987) proposes four levels of analysis at which 
interventions can operate - the individual, the interpersonal, the organizational, and the 
institutional/community. These exist hierarchically, such that the most complex level 
of analysis (the institutional/community) is inclusionary of intervention techniques 
included in the simpler analytic levels that precede it. Individual methods assume that 
social problems stem from the inadequacies of persons or subcultures in their adaption 
to society. The values of society’s institutions are perceived as benign; the goal of 
intervention being to help as many people as possible adapt to their environments. 
Individual methods utilize traditional psychological services such as mental health 
therapies, crisis intervention, training and education. At the interpersonal level, social 
problems are conceived of as symptomatic of difficulties between individuals and their 
primary groups (family, workplace, peer group). These conceptualizations of social 
problems draw principally from ideas developed within the traditions of social 
psychology and clinical psychology. The goal of intervention is to assist groups with 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 123 
communication and skill deficits so as to help group members and the social institutions 
responsible for instilling social values. Typically, interpersonal interventions target 
small groups dynamics and interpersonal interactions via family therapy, communication 
skills training or group therapy. At the level of organizational interventions, social 
problems are conceived of as the result of organizations which poorly or inefficiently 
implement societal goals and values. This perspective draws on public health and 
organizational psychology in conceptualizing social problems. The goal of intervention 
is to improve the efficiency with which organizations socialize individuals to fit into 
society. Organizational solutions are applied via systems-centered consultation aimed 
at altering organizational structure, leadership, communication and benefits through the 
organization. Lastly, at the institutional and community level of analysis, social 
problems are attributed to institutions rather than organizations, groups or individuals. 
In this approach, social change stems from altering the institutional values, goals and 
ideology which, in turn, influences the relationship within and between organizations, 
groups and individuals in society. From this perspective, intervention strategies need 
to be sensitive to the diversity that exists within communities and to the need for 
persons to have adequate access to resources. Institutional and community methods of 
intervention draw upon the techniques of community organization and social advocacy. 
The conceptual frameworks suggested by Leventhal et a!. (1980) and Rappaport 
(1977;1987) can be used to understand the studies reviewed above. The Rhode Island 
Project (Putnam, 1990), for example, was a clear attempt to influence group-level 
factors, namely the knowledge, attitudes and behavior of two occupational groups 
considered to be regulators of community drinking practices. For many of the projects 
reviewed, community functioning was conceptualized as an aggregate of individual 
behaviors rather than as an ecology of organizations and institutions in which 
indiviudals reside. For example, in four of the eight programs the mass media was a 
central component of the “community” intervention (Wallack and Burrows, 1982/83; 
Pentz et al, 1989a; Casswell et al., 1990; Gliksman et al., 1990). However, media 
messages, although applied community-wide, simply reach an aggregate of individuals 
rather than altering community functioning or the relationships between organizations 
and institutions within a community. 
Of most interest is the fact that some programs made little or no attempt to impact 
upon anything other than individual-level or interpersonal processes. This emphasis on 
individuals and primary groups stems from the theoretical orientation of the projects: 
at a conceptual level, it is not community processes such as local policies that are 
conceived of as influencing alcohol use, but essentially interpersonal factors such as 
peer pressure. The most obvious example of this is the Stay SMART Program (St. 
Pierre et al., 1992) which simply takes a school-based life skills training curriculum 
and delivers it in a youth club setting. In addition, one might also question the extent 
to which the Midwestern Prevention Project (Pentz el al., 1989a) is a true community- 
based intervention. As Gerstein and Green (1993) have recently observed, of the five 
program modalities described by its authors, only three appear to be in effect, and for 
two of these - the parental and mass media components - there is only sparse data 
available from which to judge the extent to which they have reached their target 
audiences. In addition, two of the components - the mass media program and the 
community organization efforts - were implemented in both the comparison and 
intervention communities, and so their contribution to any changes in alcohol use over 
time cannot be assessed (Johnson et al., 1990). The failure to experimentally 
124 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
manipulate the media and community organization components of the MPP and the 
absence of data indicating that parents were successfully engaged by the program, 
effectively reduces this “multicomponent” intervention to a school-based resistance 
skills training program. 
A number of the authors of the reports reviewed acknowledge the conceptual 
limitations of their programs and the fact that they made little attempt to change 
anything beyond individual behavior. Wallack and Barrows (1982/83), for example, 
attribute the failure of the California “Winners” Alcohol Program in large part to it 
being premised on theoretical models which define alcohol-related problems as 
essentially individual-level phenomenon (thereby ignoring the broader social, economic 
and political context in which alcohol use occurs). They argue that mass media and 
individual-orientated programs continue to be used in prevention programming as they 
represent a safe option that in no way challenges powerful vested interest groups within 
a community. Along similar lines, Giesbrecht and colleagues acknowledge in their 
discussions of the Tri-community Prevention Project that the type of “persuasion/ 
education” intervention that they employed was chosen primarily as it was considered 
to be “the only reasonable option” available given the circumstances under which the 
project was implemented (Giesbrecht et al., 1990, page 179). Both the demands of the 
research design and prevailing views about alcohol use within the community placed 
considerable constraints on the program, such that its potential for reducing the overall 
distribution of consumption was substantially limited. Giesbrecht et al. (1990) contend 
that the minimal requirements for an intervention that would effect change in 
consumption levels throughout a community are: first, a high degree of local concern 
about alcohol consumption and alcohol-related problems; second, the introduction of 
innovative modifications in regulatory measures; and, third, strong community 
mobilization at both the lay and professional level. Such measures, they argue, would 
impact upon the alcohol-related culture of the community, and, in turn, influence levels 
of consumption. Both Wallack and Barrows (1982/83) and Giesbrecht et af. (1990) 
accept that individual - and interpersonal-level initiatives such as education and mass 
media campaigns can be used to promote regulatory changes and community 
mobilization, but insist that these are insufficient in themselves to bring about 
substantial long-term change in alcohol use and abuse within a community. 
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS 
The need to attend to community-level processes and to engage the target community 
in the design and implementation of intervention programs are more evident in three 
projects recently commenced. Project Northland is designed to reduce the incidence 
and prevalance of alcohol use among a cohort of sixth grade adolescents from fourteen 
communities in Minnesota (Perry et al.. 1993). The broad theoretical framework of the 
project is problem behavior theory, in which adolescent alcohol use is explained in 
terms of the interaction between the social environment, personality, and behavior 
(Jessor and Jessor, 1977). This model suggests the need to attend to demand reduction 
in the community and home, as well as to supply reduction through traditional school- 
based skills training programs. 
The intervention has three components - a parent program, a peer-led school-based 
skills-training program, and a community program. The parent program is implemented 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY NTERVENTIONS 125 
during the sixth grade, and orientated around four activity books which students work 
on at home with their parentdguardians over a period of four weeks. The exercises 
included in the books focus on facts and myths about adolescent alcohol use, 
consequences of alcohol use, advertising, peer pressure, adult role models, and 
establishing family guidelines about alcohol. At the end of the program, a family fun 
night is held at the school. The school program is comprised of two cumcula for 
seventh and eight h grade students each of which is peer-led and comprised of eight 
45-minute sessions. The seventh grade curriculum is focussed on skills training to 
remain a non-drinker, and the eighth grade curriculum on skills specific to preventing 
drinking and driving. In addition to these curricula, peer-leaders are trained to organize 
social clubs which provide an arena for alcohol-free gatherings. The most innovative 
aspect of the project is the community component, the objective of which is to “ ... 
empower citizens ... to build their own capacity for prevention based on building 
networks of support and encouraging broad-based participation” (Perry et al., 1993, 
p. 133). It is built around task forces comprised of representatives from various 
community organizations, and intended to develop strategies that will reduce the access 
of adolescents to alcohol. These strategies fall into four broad areas: education of 
alcohol merchants; enforcement of existing laws concerning alcohol sales; development 
of new local ordinances regulating sales; and development of school policies 
concerning alcohol use. Community organizers are responsible for the formation of the 
task force in each community. 
The program is being assessed using a sample of sixth grade students in 24 public 
school districts located in six counties in northeastern Minnesota. Fourteen school 
districts have been randomly allocated to the intervention condition and 10 to the 
control condition. The intervention will be assessed through surveys of participating 
students, parents, community leaders (e.g., the mayor, the police chief), and merchants 
from local liquor outlets. In addition, a trial of purchase attempts by young women 
from more than 100 local liquor outlets will be undertaken to assess the ease of access 
to alcohol without age identification before and after the intervention. 
The Minnesota group is conducting a second project which places even greater 
emphasis on initiating change at the community level (Wagenaar and Wolfson, 1993). 
The Communities Mobilizing for Change on Alcohol (CMCA) Project is an 18 
community trial designed to assess the effectiveness of a community mobilization 
strategy in reducing the availability of alcohol to those under 21 years of age and the 
level of alcohol use and alcohol-related health and social problems among this age 
group. The program is designed to accomplish these goals through change in 
community policies and practices concerning alcohol use, as opposed to simply 
changing “the behavior of an aggregate of individuals in the community” (Wagenaar 
and Wolfson, 1993, p. 119). For example, the CMCA intervention will aim to reduce 
the number of outlets willing to sell to minors and diminish tolerance of this practice 
within the community, but make no attempt to teach minors the skills thought necessary 
to resist buying and using alcohol. 
Perhaps the most distinctive feature of the CMCA Project is that it does not involve 
a set of specific program components developed and designed by the research team 
prior to the recruitment and engagement of the participating communities. Rather, the 
intervention itself involves a process of community activation and mobilization, with 
communities free to implement whichever strategies and approaches they consider 
most appropriate in dealing with the problems they face. The research team does not 
I26 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
provide a ready-made “program”, but rather offers guidance through the presentation 
of information and material detailing the nature and extent of underage drinking in the 
community and the relative effectiveness of various prevention strategies. Standardization 
of the intervention across communities is present in terms of the approach being used 
to mobilize communities. This is done through the formation of a task force in each 
community, the education of the members of this group, and the use of community 
organizers to help formulate and implement a specific plan of action. 
Nine communities have been randomly assigned to receive the community 
organization intervention, with nine others acting as a comparison group. Surveys and 
time-series analysis will be used to assess the impact of the intervention on youth 
accessibility to alcohol and the level of alcohol-related behaviors and problems. 
Finally, the Prevention Research Center (PRC) Project, described by Holder and 
colleagues (Holder, 1993b; Schatz ef al., 1993), entails a more formal intervention 
program than the CMCA Project, but is similar in its emphasis upon community-level 
processes. The intervention, being implemented in two communities in California and 
one in South Carolina (each with a matched comparison site), is intended to reduce 
the number of accidents and fatalities resulting from alcohol use. It is designed in 
accordance with a clearly articulated conceptual model, in which the community is 
conceived of as a “system” involving the interaction of the individual and the 
environment. Alcohol-related accidents and fatalities are considered “outputs” of this 
system. The key factors operating within a community to produce these outputs are 
the level and pattern of alcohol consumption, the level of alcohol sales, the availability 
and marketing of alcohol, access to alcohol, community norms governing use, the 
enforcement of laws, community education, the level of risk-related activities (e.g., 
driving or using heavy machinery), and general background influences (e.g., the level 
of use of private automobiles versus public transport). 
As Holder (1993b) observes, the system perspective suggests the need for 
intervention programs that impact upon the social, economic, and physical environment 
of a community, in addition to the individuals within it. The PRC intervention has five 
components, which will be implemented over a 5-year period, and which target specific 
community-level alcohol-related problems (i.e., alcohol-related injuries). The five 
components of the intervention are (1) community mobilization through the development 
of organizations and coalitions and increased public awareness, (2) training bar staff 
and management in responsible service practices, (3) community, parent, and retailer 
education aimed at reducing underage drinking, (4) increased effectiveness of DWI 
enforcement (both actual, and as perceived by community residents), and (5) improved 
implementaiton of local ordinances governing the youth accessibility to alcohol. 
In each intervention community, the program is being implemented through a “lead 
agency” (e.g., the city council), and the project timetable includes a pretest planning 
period designed to allow maximum community involvement in the sequencing of the 
intervention components and the development of specific implementation strategies. 
The PRC program is also structured to ensure that an ongoing process of information 
sharing is established between the project staff and community representatives. At the 
outset of the study it was made clear to the project staff that schools felt “cumculumed 
out”, and therefore a decision was made to use non-school channels to implement 
program components (Schatz et al., 1993). A range of measures are being used to assess 
the intervention, including surveys, monitoring DWI arrest and media accounts, and 
analysis of outlet densities and changes in policies. 
ALCOHOL-RELAED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 127 
CONCLUSION 
Most attempts at preventing alcohol use and abuse rely upon individual-level 
interventions designed to reduce demand. This is true of school-based programs and, 
as has been shown from this review, most community-based efforts. Interventions 
which attempt only to reduce demand at the individual-level are inherently limited, and 
have not been shown to lead to substantial, long-term change in alcohol use and abuse 
(Gerstein and Green, 1993; Gorman, 1992b; in press). As Holder (1992) has recently 
observed, it is simply not possible to “inoculate” a community against alcohol-related 
problems through education and skills-based training. 
In terms of design and implementation, most prevention efforts take the form of 
standardized programs devised by outside experts, with minimal citizen participation 
in their development and little attention to the unique systems-level factors that 
generate alcohol-related problems within the target community. It has proved difficult 
to generate community involvement in such programs, and it is imperative that we 
move beyond the simplistic assumption that a common set of casual factors can explain 
alcohol abuse across diverse cultural, economic, and political settings (Gorman, 
1992b). 
Three projects which have recently begun in the USA address more directly than 
most previous efforts the issue of whether change in systems-level influences such as 
liquor outlet densities can be achieved through community-based interventions 
(Holder, 1993b; Perry et al., 1993; Wagenaar and Wolfson, 1993). At a conceptual 
level, these projects draw upon social science traditions which emphasize social and 
environmental determinants of behavior (e.g., social ecology, public health, and 
sociology), rather than the individual and intrapsychic traditions dominant in 
psychology. They have also sought to broaden the target audience of intervention 
programs, and encouraged greater community participation in the design and 
implementation process. The process and outcome data that these studies will produce, 
should greatly increase the knowledge base in this area of research. 
Among the numerous challenges that remain is to develop and implement 
community-based programs in “high risk” urban settings, where the markets for alcohol 
and other drugs tend to concentrate due to economic conditions (Gorman, 1993). A 
number of specific systems-level factors operate within cities to greatly increase the 
risk of involvement in both the licit and illicit drug market for those who live there. 
Notable in the case of alcohol is the intense marketing of inexpensive high potency 
beverages, such as malt liquor (Gifford, 1993; Marriot, 1993). Interestingly, in many 
parts of the country, inner city residents have began to develop initiatives designed. 
not to “inoculate” local youth against such pressures, but rather to limit the availability 
of alcohol within their communities and regulate the marketing and sales practices of 
local merchants (Gifford, 1993; Sims, 1992). Prevention research in high risk 
environments should build upon such efforts, and move away from the use of 
standardized programs and curricula towards a meaningful involvement of local 
citizens in the design and implementation of community interventions. As Holder 
(1993a) rightly observes, the likelihood that research will have some real impact upon 
reducing the level of alcohol-related problems within a community is greatly enhanced 
when coupled with the efforts of such “grass roots” movements. 
128 D. M. GORMAN AND P. W. SPEER 
References 
Bandura, A. (1977) Social learning theory, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Bloom, B.L. (1965) The “medical model”, miasma theory and community mental health. Community Mental 
Health Journal, 1, 333-338. 
Botvin, G.J. (1990) Substance abuse prevention: Theory, practice and effectiveness. in: M. Tonry and J.Q. 
Wilson (Eds.), Drugs and crime (pp. 461-51 9). Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Botvin, G.J., Baker, E., Dusenbury, L., Tortu. S. and Botvin, E.M. (1990) Preventing adolescent drug use 
through a multimodal cognitive-behavioral approach: Results of a 3-year study. Journal of Consulling 
and Clinical Psychology, 58, 437-446. 
Brown, J.H. and Horowitz, J.E. (1993) Deviance and deviants: Why adolescent substance use prevention 
programs do not work. Evaluarion Review, 17, 529-555. 
Carlson, C.E. (1990) HIPP A comprehensive school-based susbstance abuse program with cooperative 
community involvement. Journal of Primary Prevention, 10, 289-302. 
Casswell, S. and Gilmore, L. (1989) An evaluated community action project on alcohol. Journal of Srudies 
on Alcohol, 50. 339-346. 
Casswell, S. and Stewart, L. (1989) A community action project on alcohol: Community organization and 
its evaluation. Communiry Health Studies, 13, 3948. 
Casswell, S., Gilmore, L., Maguire, V. and Ransom, R. (1989) Changes in public support for alcohol policies 
following a community-based campaign. British Journal of Addiction. 84, 5 15-522. 
Casswell, S.. Ransom, R. and Gilmore, L. (1990) Evaluation of a mass-media campaign for the primary 
prevention of alcohol-related problems. Health Promotion International, 5. 9-17. 
Cook, R.F. and Roehl, J.A. (1993) National evaluation of the Community Partnership Program: Preliminary 
findings. In R.C. Davis, A.J. Lurigio. and D.P. Rosenbaum (Eds.), Drugs and the community: Involving 
community residents in combatting the sale of illegal drugs, (pp. 225-248). Springfield, Illinois: Charles 
C. Thomas. 
Coulehan, J.L.. Zettler-Segal, M., Block, M., McClelland, M. and Schulberg, H.C. (1987) Recognition of 
alcoholism and substance abuse in primary cme patients. Archives of Internal Medicine. 147, 349-352. 
De Labry, L.O.. Gly~, R.J.. Levenson, M.R., Hermos, J.A., LoCastro, J.S. and Vokonas, P.S. (1992) 
Alcohol consumption and mortality in an American male population: Recovering the U-shaped curve - 
findings from the normative aging study. Journal of Srudies on Alcohol, 53, 25-32. 
Douglas, R.R. (1990) Formulating alcohol policies for community recreation facilities: Tactics and problems. 
In: N. Giesbrecht, P. Conley. R.W. Denniston, L. Gliksman, H. Holder. A. Pederson, R. Room and M. 
Shain (Eds.), Research, action. and community: Experiences in the prevention of alcohol and orher drug 
problems (OSAP Prevention Monograph - 4) (pp. 61-67). Washington, DC: US Government Printing 
Office. 
Duffy. J.C. (1986) The distribution of alcohol consumption - 30 years on. British Journal of Addicrion. 81, 
Duigan. P., Casswell, S. and Stewart, L. (1993) Evaluating community projects: Conceptual and 
methodological issues illustrated from the Community Action Project and the Liquor Licensing Project 
in New Zealand. In T.K. Greenfield and R. Zimmerman (Eds.). Experiences with community action 
projects: New research in the prevention of alcohol and other drug problems (CSAP Prevention 
Monograph - 14) (pp. 20-30). Washington. DC: US Government Printing Office. 
Ellickson, P.L. and Bell, R.M. (1990) Drug prevention in junior high: A multi-site longitudinal test. Science. 
247, 1299-1305. 
Freire, P. (1973) Education for critical consciousness. New York: Seabury Press. 
Gerstein, D.R. and Green, L.W. (Eds.) (1993) Preventing drug abuse: Whar do we know? Washington DC: 
National Academy Press. 
Giesbrecht. N. and Pederson, (1992) Focusing on the drinking environment or the high-risk drinker in 
prevention projects: Limitations and opportunities. In H.D. Holder and 1. M. Howard (Eds.), Community 
prevention trials for alcohol problems: Methodologicol issues (pp. 98-1 12). Westport, Connecticut: 
Praeger. 
Giesbrecht. N. and Douglas, R.R. (1990) The demonstration project and comprehensive community 
programming: Dilemmas in prevention alcohol-related problems. Contemporary Drug Problems, 17. 
42 1-459. 
Giesbrecht, N., Pranovi, P. and Wood, L. (1990) Impediments to changing local drinking practices: Lessons 
from a prevention project. In: N. Giesbrecht. P. Conley, R.W. Denniston. L. Gliksman. H. Holder, A. 
Pederson, R. Room, and M. Shain (Eds.). Research, action. and community: Experiences in rhe prevention 
of alcohol and orher drug problems (OSAP Prevention Monograph - 4) (pp. 161-182). Washington. DC: 
US Government Printing Office. 735-741. 
Gifford. B. (1993) Booze N the hood. Washington Ciry Paper, September 3. 
Gliksman, L., Douglas, R.R., Thomson. M., Moffatt. K., Smythe, C. and Caverson, R. (1990). Promoting 
municipal alcohol policies: An evaluation of a campaign. Contemporary Drug Problems. 17, 39 1470. 
Gorman. D.M. ( 1992a) Commentary on prevention. Annual Review of Addictions Research and Trearmenr. 
2. 505-507. 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 129 
Goman, D.M. (1992b) Using theory and basic research to target primary prevention programs: Recent 
developments and future prospects. Alcohol and Alcoholism. 27, 583-594. 
Goman. D.M. (1993) “War on drugs” continues in United States under new leadership. British Medical 
Journal. 307, 369-371, 
Goman, D.M. ( 1994) Preventing adolescent druguse: The effectiveness of Project ALERT. American 
Journal of Public Health. 84. 500. 
Goman. D.M. (in press). Are school-based resistance skills training programs effective in reducing alcohol 
misuse? Journal of Drug and Alcohol Education. 
Goman, D.M., Werner, J.M., Jacobs. L.M. and Duffy, S.W. (1990) Evaluation of an education package for 
non-specialist health care and social workers. British Journal of Addiction, 85, 223-233. 
Hamngton, C.R., Putnam. S.L.. Waters. Jr., W.J. and Colt, A.M. (1989) The community gatekeeper training 
model for reducing alcohol abuse and alcohol-related injury. Rhode Island Medical Journal. 72, 
459463. 
Heller. K. (1984) Development of a community orientation. In K. Heller (Ed.), Psychology and community 
change. Chicago: The Dorsey Press. 
Hingson. R.W.. Howland. J. and Levenson, S. (1988) Effects of legislative reform to reduce drunken driving 
and alcohol-related traffic fatalities. Public Health Reports, 103, 659467. 
Holder. H. (1992) Undertaking a community prevention trial to reduce alcohol problems: Translating 
theoretical models into action. In H.D. Holder and J. M. Howard (Eds.). Community prevention trials 
for alcohol problems: Methodological issues (pp. 227-243). Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. 
Holder, H. D. (1993a) Changes in access to and availability of alcohol in the United States: Research and 
policy implications. Addiction, 88 (Supplement), 67s-74s. 
Holder, H.D. (1993b) Prevention of alcohol-related accidents in the community. Addiction, 88. 1003-1012. 
Holder, H. and Giesbrecht, N. (1990) Prespectives on the community in action research. In: N. Giesbrecht, 
P., Conley, R.W., Denniston. L., Gliksman, H. Holder, A. Pederson, R. Room. and M. Shain (Eds.), 
Research, action. and community: Experiences in the prevention of alcohol and other drug problems 
(OSAP Prevention Monograph - 4) (pp. 2740). Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
Hyndman. B. and Giesbrecht, N. (1993) Community-based substance abuse prevention research: Rhetoric 
and reality (editorial). Addiction, 88, 1613-1616. 
Jackson. R., Scragg, R. and Beaglehole. R. (1992) Alcohol consumption and risk of coronary heart disease. 
British Medical Journal. 303. 21 1-216. 
Jessor, R. and Jessor, S.L. (1977) Problem behavior and psychosocial development. San Diego, CA: 
Academic Press. 
Johnson, C.A., Pentz. M.A., Weber. M.D., Dwyer, J.H.. Baer, N., MacKinnon. D.P., Hansen. W.B. and Flay, 
B.R. ( 1990) Relative effectiveness of comprehensive community programming for drug abuse prevention 
with high-risk and low-risk adolescents. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 58, 447456. 
Kandel, D.B. (1975) Stages in adolescent involvement in drug use. Science, 190, 912-914. 
Kandel, D.B. and Yamaguchi. K. (1993) From beer to crack: developmental patterns of drug involvement. 
American Journal of Public Health. 83, 851-855. 
Kinder. B.N.. Pape. N.E. and Walfish. S. (1980) Drug and alcohol education programs: A review of outcome 
studies, International Journal of the Addictions. 15. 1035-1054. 
Klitzner. M. (1993) A public health/dynamic systems approach to community-wide alcohol and other drug 
initiatives. In: R.C. Davis, A.J. Lurigio, and D.P. Rosenbaum (Eds.). Drugs and the community: involving 
community residents in combatting the sale of illegal drugs (pp. 201-224). Springfield, Illinois: Charles 
C. Thomas. 
Lamarine, R.J. (1993) School drug education programming: in search of a new direction. Journal of Drug 
Education. 23. 325-33 1. 
Ledermann. S. (1956) Alcool, alcoolism, alcoolisation (volume 1 ). Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
Leventhal. H. and Keeshan, P. (1993) Promoting healthy alternatives to substance abuse. In S. G. Millstein, 
A. C. Petersen, and E. 0. Nightingale (Eds.). Promoting the health of adolescents: New directions for 
the twenty-first centup (pp. 260-284). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Leventhal. H., Safer. M.A.. Cleary, P.D. and Gutman, M. (1980) Cardiovascular risk modification by 
community-based programs for life-style change: Comments on the Stanford study. Journal of Consulting 
and Clinical Psychology, 48, 150-158. 
Levine. M. and Perkins. D.V. (1 987) Principles of comrnunirv psvchology: Perspectives and applications. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
Linney. J.A. ( 1990) Community psychology into the 1990’s: Capitalizing opportunity and promoting 
innovation. American Journal of Community Psychology. 18. 1-1 8. 
Lurigio, A.J. and Davis. R.C. (1992) Taking the war on drugs to the streets: The perceptual impact of four 
neighborhood drug programs. Crime and Delinquenc.~. 38. 522-538. 
Manger, T.H., Hawkins, J.D.. Haggerty. K.P. and Catalano, R.F. (1992) Mobilizing communities to reduce 
risks for drug abuse: Lessons on using research to guide prevention practice. Journal of Primary 
Prevention. 13. 3-22. 
Marlatt. G.A. and George. W. (1984). Relapse prevention: Introduction and overview of the model. British 
Journal of Addiction. 79. 261-273. 
130 
Maniot, M. (1993) For minority youth, 40 ounces of trouble. New York Times, April, 16. 
Moskowitz, J.M. (1989) The primary prevention of alcohol problems: A critical review of the research 
literature. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 50, 54-88. 
Murray, G.G. and Douglas, R.R (1988) Social marketing in the alcohol policy arena. British Journal of 
Addicrions, 83, 505-5 1 1. 
O'Malley, D., Gorman, D.M. and Speer, P.W. (1994). The sale of alcoholic beverages to minors. Public 
Health Reports. 109, 816-818. 
Pentz, M.A. (1986) Community organization and school liaisons: How to get programs started. Journal of 
School Health, 56. 382-388. 
Pentz, M.A. (1993) Comparative effects of community-based drug abuse prevention. In J.S. Baer, G.A. 
Marlatt. and R.J. McMahon (Eds.), Addictive behaviors across the life span: Prevenrion, trearment, and 
policy issues (pp. 69-87). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Pentz. M.A., Cormack. C., Flay, B.R.. Hansen. W.B. and Johnson, C.A. (1986) Balancing program and 
research integrity in community drug abuse prevntion: Project STAR approach. Journal of School Health. 
Pentz, M.A., Dwyer, J.H., MacKinnon, D.P., Flay, B.R., Hansen. W.B.. Wang, E.Y.I. and Johnson, C.A. 
(1989a) A multicommunity trial for primary prevention of adolescent drug abuse: Effects on drug use 
prevalence. Journal of the American Medical Association, 261, 3259-3266. 
Pentz. M.A., Johnson, C.A.. Dwyer, J.H., MacKinnon, D.M., Hansen, W.B. and Flay, B.R. (1989b) A 
comprehensive community approach to adolescent drug abuse prevention: Effects on cardiovascular 
disease risk behaviors. Annals of Medicine, 21, 219-222. 
Perry, C.L. and Kelder. S.H. (1992) Prevention. Annual Review of Addictions Research and Treatmenr. 2, 
453472. 
Perry. C.L., Williams, C.L., Forster, J.L., Wolfson, M., Wagenaar, A.C., Finnegan, P.G., McGovern. P.G., 
Veblen-Monenson, S., Komro, K.A. and Anstine, P.S. (1993) Background, conceptualization and design 
of a community-wide research program on adolescent alcohol use: Project Northland. Health Education 
Research: Theory and Practice, 8, 125-126. 
Potamianos, G., Gorman, D.M.. Duffy, S.W. and Peters, T.J. (1988) Alcohol consumption by patients 
attending outpatient clinics. International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 34, 97-101. 
Preusser. D.F. and Williams, A.F. (1992) Sales of alcohol to underage purchasers in three New York counties 
and Washington, DC. Journal of Public Health Policy, 13, 306-317. 
Putnam. S.L. (1990) Planning, development, and process issues in the Rhode Island Alcohol-related injury 
prevention project. In: N. Giesbrecht, P. Conley, R.W. Denniston, L. Gliksman. H. Holder, A. Pederson, 
R. Room, and M. Shain (Eds.), Research, action, and communiry: Experiences in the prevention of alcohol 
and orher drug problems (CSAP Prevention Monograph - 4) (pp. 183-195). Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office. 
Putnam. S.L.. Rockett. I.R.H. and Campbell, M.K. (1993) Methodological issues in community-based 
alcohol-related injury prevention projects: attribution of program effects. In T.K. Greenfield and R. 
Zimmerman (Eds.), Experiences with communiry action projecrs: New research in the Prevention of 
alcohol and other drug problems (CSAP Prevention Monograph - 14) (pp. 31-42). Washington, DC: US 
Government Printing Office. 
Randall. D. and Wong. M.R. (1976) Drug education to date: A review. Journal of Drug Education, 6, 
1-21. 
Rappapon, J. (1977) Communiry psychology: Research. values, and action. New York: Holt, Reinlhan and 
Winston. 
Rappapon, J. (1981) In praise of paradox: A social policy of empowerment over prevention. American 
Journal of Community Psychology, 9, 1-25. 
Rappapon, J. (1984) Studies in empowerment: Introduction to the issue. Prevention in Human Services. 5, 
1-7. 
Rappaport, J. (1987) Terms of empowementkxemplars of prevention: Toward a theory for community 
psychology. American Journal of Communiry Psychology, 15, 121-144. 
Rogers. E.M. (1983) The diffusion of innovations. New York: Free Press. 
Room, R. (1984) Alcohol control and public health. Annual Review of Public Health, 5. 293-317. 
Rothman, J., Erlich. J.L. and Teresa, J.G. (1 981) Changing organizations and community programs. 
Ryan. W. (1971) Blaming the victim. New York: Random House. 
Schatz. I., Schember. C.. Parsons. J., Rodriguez, J., Young, C. and Holder, H.D. (1993). A community-based 
alcohol and injury prevention project: Reflections from three US. communities. In T.K. Greenfield and 
R. Zimmerman (Eds.), Experiences with community acrion projecrs: New research in the prevention of 
alcohol and other drug problems (CSAP Prevention Monograph - 14) (pp. 138-145). Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing Office. 
Secretary of Health and Human Services (1990) Alcohol and Healrh (Seventh Special Repon to the US 
Congress). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. 
Shaper. A.G. (1990) Alcohol and mortality: A review of prospective studies. British Journal of Addicrion. D. M. GORMAN AM) P. W. SPEER 
56, 389-393. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
85. 837-847. 
ALCOHOL-RELATED COMMUNITY INTERVENTIONS 131 
Shea, S. and Basch. C.E. (1990a) A review of five major community-based cardiovascular disease prevention 
programs. Part I: rationale, design, and theoretical framework. American Journal of Health Promotion, 
Shea, S. and Basch. C.E. (1990b) A review of five major community-based cardiovascular disease prevention 
programs. Part 11: intervention strategies, evaluation methods, and results. American Journal of Health 
Promotion, 4, 279-287. 
Sims C. (1992) Community groups attack the industry’s rich franchise at the corner store. New York Times. 
November, 29. 
St. Pierre, T.L., Kaltreider, D.L., Mark, M.M. and Aikin. K.J. (1992) Drug prevention in a community setting: 
A longitudinal study of the relative effectiveness of a three-year primary prevention program in Boys 
and Girls Clubs across the nation. American Journal of Community Psychology, 20, 673-706. 
Stout, R.L. (1992) Prevention experiments in the context of ongoing community processes: Opportunities 
or obstacles for research. In H.D. Holder and J.M. Howard (Eds.), Communityprevention trials for alcohol 
problems: Methodological issues (pp. 121-1 33). Westport. Connecticut: Praeger. 
Stout. R.L., Rose, J.S., Speare, M.C., Buka. S.L., Laforge, R.G., Campbell, M.K. and Waters, W.J. (1993). 
Sustaining interventions in communities: The Rhode Island Community-based Prevention Trial. In T.K. 
Greenfield and R. Zimmennan (Eds.). Experiences with community action projects: New research in the 
prevention of alcohol and other drug problems (CSAP Prevention Monograph - 14) (pp. 253-261). 
Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
Tracy, J.I.. Gorman. D.M. and Leventhal, E.A. (1992) Reports of physical symptoms and alcohol use: 
Findings from a primary health care sample. Alcohol and Alcoholism. 27, 481491. 
Turner, T.B., Bennett, V.L. and Hernandez. H. (1981) The beneficial side of moderate alcohol use. Johns 
Hopkins Medical Journal. 148. 53-63. 
US Depanment of Education (1993) Youth and Alcohol: Selected Reports to the Surgeon General. 
Washington, DC: US Department of Education. 
US Public Health Service (1991) Healthy People 2000: National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 
Objectives. Washington, DC: US Department of Health and Human Services. 
Vincent, T.A. and Trickett, E.J. (1983) Preventive intervention and the human context: Ecological 
approaches to environmental assessment and change. In R.D. Felner. L.A. Jason, J.N. Moritsugu, and 
S.S. Farber (Eds.). Preventive psychology: Theory, research and practice (pp. 67-86). New York: 
Pergamon Press. 
Wagenaar. A.C. and Wolfson. M. (1993) Tradeoffs between science and practice in the design of a 
randomized community trial. In T.K. Greenfield and R. Zimmennan (Us.), Experiences with cornrnuniry 
action projects: New research in the prevention of alcohol and other drug problems (CSAP Prevention 
Monograph - 14) (pp. 119-129). Washington, DC: US Government Printing Office. 
Wagenaar. A.C. and Wolfson, M. (1994) Enforcement of the legal minimum drinking age in the United 
States. Journal of Public Health Policy. 15. 37-53. 
Wallack. L.M. (1980) Mass-media campaigns: The odds against finding behavior change. Health Education 
Quarterl.v, 8, 209-260. 
Wallack, L. (1985) A community approach to the prevention of alcohol-related problems: The San Francisco 
experience. International Quarterly of Community Health Education, 5, 85-102. 
Wallack. L. and Barrows, D.C. ( 1982/83) Evaluating primary prevention: The California “Winners” alcohol 
program. International Quarterly of Community Health Education. 3, 307-336. 
Worden. J.K., Flynn. B.S., Merrill. D.G., Waller. J.A. and Haugh, L.D. (1989) Preventing alcohol impaired 
driving through community self-regulation training. American Journal of Public Health, 79, 287-290. 4. 203-213. 
