RESEARCH ARTICLE Open Access
Embedding effective depression care: using
theory for primary care organisational and
systems change
Jane M Gunn1*, Victoria J Palmer1, Christopher F Dowrick2, Helen E Herrman3, Frances E Griffiths4,
Renata Kokanovic5, Grant A Blashki6, Kelsey L Hegarty1, Caroline L Johnson1, Maria Potiriadis1, Carl R May7
Abstract
Background: Depression and related disorders represent a significant part of general practitioners (GPs) daily work.
Implementing the evidence about what works for depression care into routine practice presents a challenge for
researchers and service designers. The emerging consensus is that the transfer of efficacious interventions into
routine practice is strongly linked to how well the interventions are based upon theory and take into account the
contextual factors of the setting into which they are to be transferred. We set out to develop a conceptual
framework to guide change and the implementation of best practice depression care in the primary care setting.
Methods: We used a mixed method, observational approach to gather data about routine depression care in a
range of primary care settings via: audit of electronic health records; observation of routine clinical care; and
structured, facilitated whole of organisation meetings. Audit data were summarised using simple descriptive
statistics. Observational data were collected using field notes. Organisational meetings were audio taped and
transcribed. All the data sets were grouped, by organisation, and considered as a whole case. Normalisation
Process Theory (NPT) was identified as an analytical theory to guide the conceptual framework development.
Results: Five privately owned primary care organisations (general practices) and one community health centre
took part over the course of 18 months. We successfully developed a conceptual framework for implementing an
effective model of depression care based on the four constructs of NPT: coherence, which proposes that
depression work requires the conceptualisation of boundaries of who is depressed and who is not depressed and
techniques for dealing with diffuseness; cognitive participation, which proposes that depression work requires
engagement with a shared set of techniques that deal with depression as a health problem; collective action,
which proposes that agreement is reached about how care is organised; and reflexive monitoring, which proposes
that depression work requires agreement about how depression work will be monitored at the patient and
practice level. We describe how these constructs can be used to guide the design and implementation of effective
depression care in a way that can take account of contextual differences.
Conclusions: Ideas about what is required for an effective model and system of depression care in primary care
need to be accompanied by theoretically informed frameworks that consider how these can be implemented. The
conceptual framework we have presented can be used to guide organisational and system change to develop
common language around each construct between policy makers, service users, professionals, and researchers. This
shared understanding across groups is fundamental to the effective implementation of change in primary care for
depression.
* Correspondence: j.gunn@unimelb.edu.au
1Primary Care Research Unit, The Department of General Practice, School of
Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleGunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62
Implementation
Science
© 2010 Gunn et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
Background
Depression and related disorders represent a significant
part of general practitioners (GPs) daily work [1,2].Internationally, governments and service providers are
grappling with how to improve the delivery and systems
for depression care to reduce the personal and financialburden on the health care system and society. Improv-ing depression care is complicated by difficultiesresearchers and policy makers face in terms of thetransfer and implementation of the evidence about whatworks into routine practice [2,3]. For example, the ‘col-
laborative care model ’for depression care, originating in
the USA, has shown promise for improving patient
health outcomes for depression [4-6], but there is uncer-tainty as to whether this model of care will effectivelytranslate to other health care systems and routineembedding within the setting in which it was developedhas not yet occurred [7]. Locally specific trials areunderway in the UK [8,9], the Netherlands [10], andIndia [11] that will provide further insight into this
question. There is also growing awareness that complex
interventions, such as ‘collaborative care, ’require careful
attention to theory, process, and context [12,13] to max-imise their effectiveness and to facilitate the likelihoodof transfer into routine clinical care. The emerging con-sensus is that the transfer of efficacious interventionsinto routine practice is strongly linked to how well theinterventions take into account the contextual factors of
the setting into which they are to be transferred [14].
The focus on the importance of understanding, and
taking into account, contextual factors has informed therevision of the 2008 Medical Research Council (MRC)guidance for the evaluation of complex interventions[12]. There is a call for greater emphasis on the use oftheory to inform the design of interventions and formore time to be spent on piloting and refining an inter-
vention prior to evaluating effectiveness. To date, inter-
vention design has experienced somewhat of atheoretical vacuum [15]; depression interventions are noexception. The next challenge is to ensure that theimplemented interventions are sustainable. This has ledto a call for so-called ‘self-improving health systems, ’
which are built upon a culture of continuous learning,reflection, and service improvement [16,17].
In view of this, we began the re-order (re-organising
care for depression and related disorders in the Austra-lian primary care setting) project. Re-order was underta-ken over three years and sought to explore, in-depth,contextual factors impacting on depression care in orderto define what is required for an effective model ofdepression care and how that model of care might beimplemented. Table 1 presents a summary of our pre-
viously published research, which involved a widestakeholder consultation to gather the views of patients
and community members about what is required fordepression care [18]. Based on extensive consultationswith over 500 primary care patients and 300 communitymembers from non-government, government, academic,and other health services, re-order identified a concep-
tual design for an effective model and system of depres-
sion care. The design is based on three domains of care:the relational, the competency, and systems domains[18]. The aim of this paper is to report our in-depthwork with six primary care organisations to identify thecomponents of an effective m odel of depression care.
We present this work as a conceptual framework toguide how to implement organisational and systems
change in mental health care reform in primary care.
Methods
To explore the context of primary care and the way it
responds to people experiencing depression, ourapproach was informed by the view that primary care isa complex adaptive system (CAS) [19,20]. Such systemsare said to consist of different members and compo-
nents that are dynamic, interactive, and dependent.
These systems are adaptive with the capacity to changeand to self-organise; they have shadow systems operat-ing in daily work; they have emergent properties thatare more than the sum of individual parts, and showinitial conditions that can markedly influence what hap-pens in practice [21]. We sought to collect data tounderstand all of these elements at work in a number of
primary care organisations. To identify the components
of an effective system for depression care, we firstsought to understand how depression care was function-ing in each organisation. To facilitate this, we used amethod informed by the principles of participatoryaction research (PAR) [22] and utilised a mix of quanti-tative and qualitative methods as outlined below.
Approval was sought and gained from the Human
Research Ethics Committe e at The University of Mel-
bourne HREC Approval No. 120406.
Sample
Organisations were purposefully sampled from urban,outer urban, and regional locations of Victoria and Tas-mania. Purposeful sampling is a common method ofrecruitment in qualitative research and sites are selected
to provide information rich cases that reveal in-depth
understanding rather than empirical generalisations [23].As re-order sought to identify a model and system ofdepression care informed by currently available bestpractice, we sampled from the V ictoria Practice-Based
Research Network (VicReN). Member organisations ofVicReN were deemed to be the most likely candidatesGunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 2 of 15
to illustrate best practices (although there are many
examples of excellent care delivered in a variety of set-tings). The sample size was in tentionally small due to
the extensive data collection process and high level of
participation required from practices. Figure 1 illustrates
the recruitment process undertaken.
Seven eligible primary care organisations were identi-
fied. Each had from two up to ten or more GPs workingwithin them plus other professionals (receptionists,practice nurses, dieticians, diabetic nurse educators, psy-chologists, and social worker s). Five organisations were
privately owned by principal GPs, one was a corporate
owned health centre, and one was a publicly funded
community health centre. A r esearcher telephoned the
manager or principal GP to explain the study and sent aformal letter of invitation and an information brochureto practices. An organisational meeting was schedule forall staff including receptionists, practice nurses, GPs andany other health professionals employed. A 30-minutepresentation was delivered to all seven organisations.
The research team outlined the study aims, available
policy, and research evidence on depression care andthe data collection processes. Organisations that agreedto participate were paid $5,000 (AU) remuneration fortheir time taken to facilitate data collection and toattend meetings.
Data collection
Data collection was conducted over 18 months (2007 to2008). Combinations of qualitative and quantitative datacollection methods were used to understand each orga-nisation as a CAS; these methods are illustrated in Fig-ure 2. The research methods were informed by previousstudies that had sought to describe family practice inthe US through the lens of complexity theory [24-27].Quantitative methods
The audit method [28] was employed to identify readilyavailable information about the numbers of adultpatients in the previous 12-month period who had anexisting diagnosis of depression, and/or were takingantidepressant medications and how often they attended
clinics. The audits were facilitated by a trained research
assistant (MP) who assisted key staff to search medical
records. MP also completed practice checklists to docu-ment the opening hours of practices, number of full-time equivalent staff, information readily available topatients in waiting rooms, and to produce an individualfloor plan of each organisation and its physical layout.
Qualitative methods
Available documents on depression care including policyand procedures were collected from organisations toinform our understanding of the context in which wewere observing practice. A graduate anthropologist (BK)visited practices each week for up to eight months toconduct observations [26]. Field notes were written bythe observer detailing their perspective on commonly
experienced behaviours, routines, events, and the setting
[29]. In addition to this, all staff participated in monthlymeetings that were audio recorded and professionallytranscribed. Meetings included receptionists, practicenurses, GPs, and other health professionals; all partici-pant names and organisations were de-identified andpseudonyms were allocated. Transcripts were checkedfor quality assurance by liste ning to selections of audio
files and cross checking wit h transcripts for accuracy
(VP).
A non-medically trained person facilitated the meet-
ings (VP) using PAR methods to engage participants ina process of observation, reflection, and discussion [22].Table 1 Summary of stakeholder informed conceptual design of an effective model and system of depression care
Domain Criteria
Requirements in the Relational Domain Stakeholders want to be ‘listened to, ’‘understood, ’‘empathised with, ’‘supported, ’‘reassured, ’and
‘encouraged ’by care providers (particularly GPs), receive depression care that is ‘holistic, ’‘tailored to
the individual, ’and ‘involves the patient in planning. ’
Requirements in the Competency Domain Stakeholders want ‘competent and thorough diagnosis and management, ’‘assessment for severity
and suicide risk, ’‘appropriate and timely referrals, ’‘incorporation of social factors, ’‘monitoring and
follow up, ’‘education about depression, ’and ‘prescription and management of medication. ’
Requirements in the Systems Domain Stakeholders want ‘funding for longer consultations and follow-up, ’‘systems to enable monitoring, ’
‘timely referral through a range of treatment options, ’‘the integration of primary care and other
providers, ’and ‘professional support to general practice. ’
How can the effectiveness of the Relational
Domain be assessed?’Measuring patient satisfaction, ’‘surveying patients, carers, GPs and consumer groups, ’and
‘monitoring patient recovery. ’
How can the effectiveness of the
Competency Domain be assessed?’Measuring whether there is less reliance on medication and a medical model, ’‘monitoring recovery
and diagnosis rates, ’‘monitoring patients capacity to function physically, socially, and in the
community, ’and ‘developing appropriate prescribing. ’
How can the effectiveness of the Systems
Domain be assessed?’Measuring for ‘increases in referral options and services in regional areas, ’‘patient satisfaction, ’
‘access and affordability of services, ’‘monitoring referrals made by GPs, ’‘monitoring the duration
and quality of follow up, ’‘monitoring the number of patients seeking help, ’and ‘monitoring
collaboration. ’Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 3 of 15
Using PAR approaches enabled us to develop under-
standing from the bottom up about the context and
processes used for depression care within each organisa-
tion. Structured activities were used in the meetings,
which included: staff identifying their perceived
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and challenges for
depression care; their individual views on depression
and the system of depression care; discussing the audit
findings; providing feedback on previously gathered data
on what is required for an effective model and system of
depression care; reflecting back the observations of the
observer; and identifying possible areas of change fromthe organisational level to improve depression care. Data
collected from meetings were used to inform the devel-
opment of the conceptual framework for embedding
effective depression care in the primary care setting.
Data analysis
All data sets from each organisation were combined and
considered as a whole case. Although the aim of the re-
order project was to identify the components of an
effective model of depression care, data revealed diffuse
processes and systems of practice for depression care.
While components of depression care were evident,
Figure 1 Recruitment flowchart for re-order .Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 4 of 15
cases indicated that more theoretical consideration was
required about how to facilit ate organisational and sys-
tem change to implement effective models of depression
care. As a result, the study team decided that Normali-
sation Process Theory (NPT, see below) could provide
an analytical theory to develop a conceptual framework
to guide the implementation of an effective model and
system of depression care. The process of identifying
and testing NPT suitability for this task is outlined in
Figure 3.
NPT as an analytical framework
We selected NPT to guide our analysis as it provides an
‘explanatory framework for investigating the routine
embedding of material practices in social contexts ’[30].
NPT is based upon four interactive constructs termed
‘coherence, ’‘cognitive participation, ’‘collective action, ’
and ‘reflexive monitoring. ’[31-33]. NPT postulates that
in order to become a routine, practice work has to be
done to define and organise the objects of a practice
(coherence), participants have to enrol in a work prac-
tice (cognitive participation), work has to be undertakento define and organise the enacting of a practice (collec-
t i v ea c t i o n ) ,a n dw o r kh a st ob ed o n et od e f i n ea n d
organise the knowledge upon which appraisal of a prac-
tice is founded (reflexive monitoring). The starting point
of NPT is ‘what is the work? ’[30].
Our first step was to explore how NPT could be
applied to depression care. JG, VP, and CM initially met
to develop four propositions for depression care that
corresponded with each construct (see Table 2). Table 2
also outlines the set of questions JG and VP developed
for each proposition to guide the analysis of meeting
transcripts.
The propositions were tested for adequacy by mem-
bers of the research team (CD, FG, HH, KH, RK, CJ),
not involved in the analysis to date. Testing occurred
using a secure web-based file sharing system. Members
of the research team were provided with an analysis
template that had each proposition listed out as a state-
ment. There was no reference or indication of the rela-
tionship of the statements to NPT constructs. Members
of the research team read selections of meeting tran-
scripts and observer notes to find examples that
Figure 2 Data collection methods for re-order .Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 5 of 15
confirmed or disconfirmed each statement. This
approach worked well with investigators participating in
the task and agreeing that the four propositions could
cover the issues spoken about within the transcripts.
JG and VP applied the NPT constructs and proposi-
tions to each meeting transcript. All data from tran-
scripts were coded to a particular proposition until data
saturation occurred. We checked audit data and obser-
vational notes for examples that supported the four pro-
positions also. Our final step was to present our ideas
for the conceptual framework back to representativesfrom each organisation at a workshop on completion of
the study. At this final workshop, we observed the parti-
cipants working with the proposed framework as they
identified examples of what is required for each con-
struct (coherence, cognitive participation, collective
action, and reflexive monitoring) and planned how to
implement best practice depression care.
Results
Six primary care organisations were recruited as shown
in Table 3. Organisations varied in ownership and size.
Five were privately owned (four were owned by principal
GPs and one was a corporate owned health centre) one
was a public funded community health centre. Organisa-
tions were located in urban (n = 4), outer urban (n = 1),
and a regional centre of Tasmania, Australia (n = 1).
Each organisation had other health care staff and recep-
tionists employed, and many had co-located allied health
and psychologists within their practice. The second
outer urban practice declined to participate due to
heavy teaching commitments.
While re-order sought a whole of organisation
approach, participation vari ed as illustrated in Table 4.
Frank had 8/12 (66.7%) participants, Gibson 5/8 (62.5%),
Eastvale 10/19 (52.6%), Coopers 11/27 (40.7%); South-
ville 12/32 (37.5%), and West Sanders 9/27 (33.3%). The
larger sized organisations of Southville and West San-
ders had lower participation rates due to numbers of
reception staff who did not participate. Other participa-
tion rates were affected by staff not being rostered on
the day meetings were held, annual leave arrangements,
a n dt h ep a r t - t i m en a t u r eo fm a n ys t a f f .T h e s ef a c t o r s
affected attendance rates at monthly meetings. Although
the research team suggested that all staff participate, we
were not aware of any co-located psychologists being
invited. There were 55/123 (44.7%) professional partici-
pants across all organisations. Participation from profes-
sional groups consisted of 28/42 (66.7%) GPs, 9/16
(56.3%) practice nurses, 3/5 (60%) managers, 3/33 (9.1%)
receptionists, 0/6 (0%) co-l ocated psychologists, 11/21
(52.4%) other professionals (a mix of social workers, die-
ticians, interpreters, and other practice professionals).
Using NPT to develop a conceptual framework
Table 5 shows a selection of examples identified from
transcripts to illustrate each proposition and construct.
These examples informed the development of a concep-
tual framework for how to implement and embed an
effective model and system of depression.
While the constructs are presented in a sequence in
Figure 4, they should be thought of as operating concur-
rently in practice; the system will only function seam-
lessly if all are present and attended to. Our starting
point for implementing an effective model of depression
Figure 3 Theory-building process for conceptual framework .Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 6 of 15
Table 2 Interpretive framework of NPT developed and applied for analysis
Propositions Developed and Tested Corresponding
ConstructsMay and FinchOur interpretation of the constructs to guide data
analysis
Depression work requires conceptualisation of boundaries
(who is depressed/who is not depressed). Depression workrequires techniques for dealing with diffuseness.Coherence
(Do people knowwhat the work is?)How do participants conceptualise boundaries around
depression care work? Is there evidence that depression isviewed as a diffuse problem? What is the meaning attributedto depression and depression work. How is depression workspecified and differentiated? What practices define
depression work? Are these practices more than a set of
acts?
Depression work requires engagement with a shared set of
techniques that deal with depression as a health problem.Cognitive
Participation(Do people join in todepression work?)How do participants engage with, initiate and enrol in
depression work? How is depression work legitimated? Whatnorms and conventions of practices exist around depressioncare? Is there evidence of joining and buying in todepression work?
Depression work requires agreement about how care is
organised-who is required to deliver care, and their structuraland human interactions.Collective Action
(Skill-Set Workability& Interactional
Workability)
(How do people dothe work?)Skill Set Workability: Examples of external rules (formal and
informal) that govern depression work and the relationshipbetween these and behaviours. (Policies for example).
Examples of the organisation of the work - divisions of
labour; who does what and how it is performed?Contextual Integration: How is work resourced? Where is
the power? Is there formal or informal agreement about thevalue of work?Interactional Workability: How is the work conducted?
What are the informal rules that govern this work? Examples
of cooperation to do the work. Examples of goals set for the
work. Examples of the meaning given to the work.Relational Integration: How is the work dispersed?
Depression work requires the ongoing assessment of how
depression care is done.Reflexive Monitoring
(How do we knowthat the work ishappening?)How do people review and reflect upon depression work?
How is depression care monitored?
Table 3 Participating Organisations and Characteristics
Practice (n=number of participating GPs at commencement)
Organisational Characteristics Eastvale (n =
5)Gibson (n =
1)Frank (n =
4)Southville (n =
7)Coopers (n =
7)West Sanders (n =
9)
Funding Structure
Privately owned primary care sites YY YY
Corporatised primary care site Y
Publicly funded community health
centreY
Location
Urban YY Y Y
Outer Urban Y
Regional Y
Personnel employed in the practice (in
total)
GP(s) 6 2 4 8 8 14
Practice nurse(s) 2 3 2 4 2 3Registrar(s) 1 0 0 0 0 1Psychologist(s) 1 1 0 2 1 1Practice manager(s) 1 0 1 1 1 1Receptionist(s) 6 2 3 10 5 7Other 2 0 2 7 10 0Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 7 of 15
care is based on the construct of coherence and the pro-
position that depression work requires the conceptuali-sation of boundaries of who is depressed and who is notdepressed, and techniques for dealing with diffuseness.To facilitate the routine adoption of an effective modeland system of care, all actors need to have a sharedunderstanding of what depression and depression work
means.
During the structured activities conducted in meet-
ings, staff from receptionists, GPs to practice nursesdemonstrated a variety of meanings for depression.Descriptions of depression care as ‘a maze, ’‘complex, ’
‘interconnected, ’‘grey or uncertain, ’‘not black and
white, ’‘multi-factorial, ’‘aj o u r n e y , ’‘confusing, ’‘diffuse
and discursive, ’‘amorphous, ’‘mysterious, ’‘complicated, ’
and ‘strongly embedded ’were commonly used. GPs, as
Table 5 highlights, saw depression as difficult to cate-gorise because of the interrelationship with social andpractical issues for patients, and the inseparable natureof many physical, emotional, and psychological issues.
GPs discussed the challeng es of sorting out distress
from depression and in particular not missing or over-looking physical problems. Two distinct practice styles
appeared to be in operation –clinicians tended to be
either integrators (seeing physical and mental health asinextricably linked dealing with both within a singleconsultation) or separators (those who tended to dealwith physical health and mental health separately). Thisillustrated that depression work is not neat and easilyarticulated. As Table 5 also shows, GPs were aware ofthe diagnostic criteria of Major Depressive Disorder
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual for
Mental Disorders DSM-IV [34], but they questioned theusefulness and applicability of these criteria to the gen-eral practice setting. Patients were described aspresenting in a ‘grey zone ’and GPs outlined that their
work was to explore the set of presenting symptoms orproblems using clinical and communication skills. Theyplaced this in the context of the patient with their cur-rent and prior knowledge of the person and their socialsituation.
Our data analysis showed that to date there is not a
shared understanding about what constitutes depressiona n dd e p r e s s i o nw o r ki nt h e primary care setting. The
importance of developing this is outlined in coherencein Figure 4. This understanding needs to emerge in con-junction with construct two cognitive participation andthe accompanying proposition that depression workrequires engagement with a shared set of techniques
that deal with depression as a health problem. Construct
two focuses attention on the need to get practice staff toactively engage and ‘join-in ’with depression work. More
than this, however, is a need to acknowledge the role ofthe patient and important carers, family members, andfriends in cognitively participating in depression workand the sets of techniques used as a legitimate healthproblem.
Table 5 illustrates the current techniques for dealing
with depression as a health problem fall into two mainareas of discussion: ‘diagnostic ’techniques and ‘manage-
ment or treatment ’techniques. Validated or structured
symptom checklist tools to a ssist with diagnosis were
spontaneously mentioned within some groups, usuallyin the context of not adding much to what was alreadyknown by the doctor. Rarely, the option of a second opi-
nion was mentioned as a useful diagnostic tool, as was a
‘trial of treatment. ’Negotiating expectations with the
patient was commonly outlined as was referral, psycho-logical intervention, listening, reviewing, and findingmore time for patients. Three common approacheswere identifiable in transcripts, those whom preferredpharmaceutical options, those whom preferred non-pharmaceutical therapies administered, in the first
instance by themselves and those whom preferred to
refer (usually to psychology).
GPs also detailed the fundamental importance of
patient buy-in for dealing with depression as a healthproblem. When patients do not buy-in to techniques fordealing with depression, for example taking medication,it means that other agreed upon techniques should bedrawn on. Likewise, if patients do not buy-in to having
a health problem called depression, treating and mana-
ging the problem remains elusive. As the quotes fromGPs in Table 5 show, recording diagnoses of mentalhealth problems in the medical record was a highly sen-sitive and confidential matter.
Thus, coupled with the varied understandings of
depression and depression work, there is still limitedagreement and engagement with a shared set ofTable 4 Staff Participation
Study
organisation(n=total staff)Participants (N = 55)
GP‡PM†PN
±Rec* Other^ Total Participation
(%)
Eastvale (n =
19)4 1 2 3 0 10 (52.6)
Gibson (n = 8) 1 0 3 1 0 5 (62.5)
Frank (n = 12) 3 1 0 0 4 8 (66.7)
Southville (n =
32)7 0 3 0 2 12 (37.5)
Coopers (n =
27)4 1 1 0 5 11 (40.7)
West Sanders
(n = 27)9 0 0 0 0 9 (33.3)
TOTAL 28 3 9 4 11 55
‡GP = General Practitioner, †PM = Practice Manager, ± PN = Practice Nurse,
*Rec = Receptionist, ^Other = includes other practice health professionalsGunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 8 of 15
Table 5 Participant views informing the conceptual framework
Domain Participant Views
COHERENCE The meaning of depression
Developing a shared
understanding of what
constitutes depression anddepression work...In the end a lot of the so-called ‘depression ’that we see is related to practical issues like, they haven ’t
got a job or they ’re caring for five children and a sick grandma, all of those sorts of things...they ’re not
sitting there with existential angst wondering about the meaning of life. It ’s because of practical issues
they ’re so-called ‘depressed ’in many cases (GP Coopers Road Practice Meeting 2: 12).
...I think so often they ’re so deeply meshed, the physical, the emotional and the psychological, that as
soon as you start impact on one, you end up impacting on the other...[psychologists] are not sittingthere thinking, ‘gosh is this the manifestation of heart disease ’? So, GPs have got a step before then. I
don ’t see that these are two separate things that are warring with each other –the psychological versus
the physical. It ’s just part of the melting pot, the mess really (GP Coopers Road Practice Meeting 3: 5).
...If someone who came to seem me as initially a first port of call, I would probably try to work thatthrough. The next level you ’ve got in my mind is, that, I ’m starting to realise that the next level of
patients are in that ‘grey zone, ’they ’ve got mood disorders, they have all sorts of issues with work,
family, illness and what have you. They ’re not quite classically, fully depressed by a DSM-IV criteria, but
they are in what some people now seem to be calling a disregulated zone. They are not quite fully
depressed, but they ’re not quite right (GP Eastvale Practice Meeting 3: 13).
Diffuse boundaries...Diagnosis Management is so hard. Do you have to define it and say this is depression, this is anxiety. Idon ’t think that you can (GP West Sanders Practice Meeting 5: 13).
The meaning of depression work...What I will often do, is, if I ’m seeing somebody and I think, ‘well, is this masked depression
presenting ’?I’ll just put ‘query depression, investigate next attendance. ’So the next time that they come
in I take the opportunity to then take it further and look at it....I think that happens with depression as
there ’s so many different gradients (GP Franklin Street Practice Meeting 4: 13).
...I think sometimes though, if you ’re focusing on a psychological problem you have to be careful that
you don ’t actually miss the very obviously physical problem, that there is some pathology going on that
you need to try and treat with medication. Sometimes, it ’s finding that balance (GP Coopers Road
Practice Meeting 2: 5).
...I think what would probably be the biggest concern, from our perspective...is because you know
you ’re going to miss –at the end of the day, you ’re going to miss things
–and you ’re going to miss
things in depression, or going to miss it in heart disease or stroke or all of those things. Consequentlyyou ’re constantly aware that the next patient who comes in could have a problem that, if you miss,
could have a profound effect on the rest of their lives. That happens every 15 minutes (GP FranklinStreet Practice Meeting 2: 21).
COGNITIVE PARTICIPATION Agreement on techniques
Agreement and engagement
with a shared set oftechniques that deal with
depression as a health
problem....Look, I think with depression it is a bit of give and take. I think when you are seeing a patient who is
depressed you often ask, ‘well, what are your expectations? You ’ve come to see me regarding
depression, what are your thoughts and how can I offer assistance ’?I t’s not just a matter of saying
you ’re depressed, this is what you ’re going to take and, you know, it will go away. I mean obviously it ’s
an interaction and the whole idea of the doctor patient interaction is to actually work out what theexpectations are with the patient and how best to manage that. If it means further referrals andpsychological interventions, if it means just listening, if it means regular reviews, finding more time, Imean you work that out with the patient (GP Southville Practice Meeting 1: 19)....You know, you tell [patients] what to do [for hypertension] and they go, ‘good. ’For depression, they
go, ‘no I ’m not taking antidepressants. ’You know, they have much more fixed ideas, and for various
reasons. So, there ’s a lot more finding out where they ’re at, and then negotiating your way through
than for a lot of straightforward medical illness (GP West Sanders Practice Meeting 1: 23).Engagement with shared techniques (patients included)...Look, someone was in yesterday who I think has been depressed for ages and was talking about thisand I said to her, ‘look, you are really depressed. We need to talk about this. ’She knew that something
was not right, but she really didn ’t want to go there...that sort of stuff happens quite often (GP Gibson
Practice Meeting 3: 2).
...What do you do if you make a diagnosis but the patient refuses to accept it? I had two patients...one,she just had this terrible half a dozen years, the business went bankrupt and her marriage broke up andshe ’s changed jobs about four times. Her dad died, her mother died when she was young and she ’sn o
longer speaking to her brother because of the fights about the will and because there was the new wifewho had the fights about the will and [the patient] felt that she was left to do the fighting. Yet, she ’s
says that she ’s not depressed because people in her family are not depressed...So what do you write in
her notes? If I say to this patient, ‘I think that you ’re depressed, ’and they say, ‘no, I ’m not, ’then do you
put it in their notes? (GP Franklin Street Practice Meeting 4: 7-8).Legitimacy of depression as a health problem...I wouldn ’t have thought we had that many patients with depression presenting previous to the
government funding coming in [for structured mental health plans]...because sometimes I think thatmaybe they are not really depressed but because it is rebated they are coming in? (Receptionist Gibson
Practice Meeting 2: 15).Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 9 of 15
techniques that deal with depression as a health pro-
blem in primary care. Figure 4 outlines the role thatcognitive participation has for embedding a model ofdepression care. In addition to this, construct three col-lective action advocates that depression work requiresagreement about how care is organised –who is
required to deliver care, and their structural and humaninteractions. The NPT concept of collective action is
defined as purposive action aimed at a clear goal and is
influenced by both organisati onal (external) factors andimmediate (internal) factors. Collective action is
explained as a combination of skill-set workability (howwork is allocated and performed), interactional work-ability (how well work fits into current practice), rela-tional integration (accountability and confidence withincare network), and contextual integration (structuresand procedures that facilitate the work).
T h e r ea r ean u m b e ro fe x t e r n a la n di n t e r n a lf a c t o r s
required to support and en able this construct. This
includes the development of organisational policiesTable 5 Participant views informing the conceptual framework (Continued)
COLLECTIVE ACTION Skill set workability
Agreement about how care is
organised. Who is required todeliver care, and theirstructural and humaninteractions....A couple of patients come to mind because there has been a combination of assessing the depression,
then there was housing, then there was visa, then there was parenting and, you know, there wereservices just flying everywhere and I was trying to figure out how to combine them...It was Monday yougo to her, Tuesday you go there and Wednesday you go there. So I found that a bit overwhelming interms of how to pull that together and even to get them to see the people they needed (GP Coopers
Road Practice Meeting 4: 21).
...I mean, I find it very hard to get your patients booked in with private psychiatrists, especially as a lotof psychiatrists have got closed books (GP Southville Practice Meeting 4: 18)....I saw in this general practice, this mental health nurse was actually facilitating the care in a way thattook a lot of the arduousness out of if for the GP and in doing that she did a bit of low grade kind ofcounseling at the same time as doing the process (GP West Sanders Practice Meeting 5: 6).
...I don ’t think it ’s appropriate for practice nurses to do depression care, it ’s a three year course (Practice
Nurse Southville Practice Meeting 3: 13).Contextual integration...I don ’t want to leave the consulting room to go out and get one of those [depression] brochures and
then walk back in and give it to the patient (GP Southville Practice Meeting 4: 3)....The trouble is that importing portable document files (PDFs) into our electronic medical record systemis an exercise in intermittent frustrations because sometimes they stay and sometimes they don ’t. We ’ve
tried to do it before (GP Southville Practice Meeting 4: 5).
...The other thing that would help toward a model of depression care is having a more thoroughdatabase for referrals. I think it ’s quite difficult sometimes to assess or to know which psychologists
have experience or expertise in particular areas. The same even with psychiatrists. Sometimes it feelslike you ’re just sort of sending patients off a bit blindly and hoping it works out (GP West Sanders
Practice Meeting 5: 9).
Interactional workability
...With the resources, I don ’t think that I ’d be giving anything out unless really Meredith (GP) said you
could give them such and such because I wouldn ’t know what to give out for the type of condition the
patient has got (Practice Nurse Gibson Street Practice Meeting 4: 19).Relational integration...I guess just in terms of the mental health care nurse, I am not clear which part of it I ’d be happy for
someone else to do (GP West Sanders Practice Meeting 5:7).
...I think, from my point of view it is recognition. I certainly don ’t know of patients that have depression.
How am I to know? How is that going to be flagged to me, that this particular person is somebody thatI have to spend that extra three to four minutes with....so that is my concern (Receptionist EastvalePractice Meeting 3: 14)....The thing that I find is that I don ’t think that I ’m skilled enough to do the counseling that
psychologists can do. I mean they really are doing this day in and day out - we ’re actually doing a lot of
other things. I mean we ’re diagnosing a lot of other different illnesses, treating a lot of different
illnesses...Even if we did have more time, I don ’t think GPs, the majority of us are trained enough to be
able to input the strategies that psychologists can (GP Southville Practice Meeting 2: 14).
REFLEXIVE MONITORING Monitoring for effective depression care
Depression work requires the
ongoing assessment of howdepression care is done ....A lot of psychologists don ’t have any time or really much to do with doctors because the ones that, even the
ones that we ’ve had long term close liaison with, it ’s been a battle for them to get their acts together and
prepare letters...it ’s something professionally that they ’ve never done - they ’ve seen themselves as quite separate
(GP Eastvale Practice Meeting 3: 10)....For monitoring quantitative auditing could help and Balint groups and some sort of organised supportmechanisms for GPs (GP Coopers Road Evaluation Meeting 1: 1).
...What are the measures? Is the care - what the patient wants or what the evidence would suggest would help
them? (GP Franklin Street Evaluation Meeting 1:1)....Always a follow-up visit. It is amazing that follow up visit. I reckon almost 50% feel - they ’ve had the blood tests,
they ’ve been understood, and they ’re actually able to move on from there, with very little extra support (GP West
Sanders Practice Meeting 2: 13).Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 10 of 15
about the practice team skill set that is required for
depression care, and how the work is to be allocated to
optimise these skill sets within available funding
mechanisms. Table 5 shows that there needs to be con-
siderable attention to how work is organised and allo-
cated at the organisational level. Practice nurses, for
example, expressed some doubts about their role in deli-
vering depression care, as d id receptionists. They felt
their current role in depression care was to play a sup-
portive, listening role to patients given the time con-
straints of GPs. But they also mentioned being uncertain
about the information to give to patients; they expressed
some feelings of being poorly equipped to deal with
depression and suggested they would need specific train-
ing. Reception staff said that if they were to play a role
in depression care it would be difficult for them to
know if a patient was depressed. In turn, GPs were not
certain which aspects of depression care could be allo-
cated to practice nurses. While they also acknowledged
the important role that the reception staff played, it was
uncertain how work would be allocated at an organisa-
tional level.In addition to internal skills, keeping abreast of policy
and funding changes and having mechanisms in place to
ensure that such policies are reviewed is a necessary
part of organising depressi on work. External support
from government and other relevant bodies is also
needed to develop functiona l communication pathways
within organisations (both between staff and with
patients) and the technolog ical systems, for example,
messaging systems, electroni c medical record support,
newsletters, and emails to patients. Sharing of medical
records within and beyond th e organisation and issues
of confidentiality need to be supported and discussed.
The physical infrastructure of many primary care orga-
nisations needs to be improved for staff to meet regu-
larly and conflict resolution mechanisms also need to be
developed to actively address disagreements.
Without resourcing, formal agreements, and shared
understanding it is not surp rising that construct four,
reflexive monitoring, rema ins underdeveloped in pri-
mary care organisations. Figure 4 shows this in relation
to the additional three constructs. The fourth construct
is based on the proposition that depression work
Figure 4 A conceptual framework to implement an effective model and system of depression care .Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 11 of 15
requires the ongoing assessment of how depression care
is done. Currently, the opportunities for primary careorganisations to self-assess the effectiveness of theirdepression care are minimal.
One of the reasons for this is the lack of consistency
regarding the recording of diagnostic information about
depression or distress, parti cularly in electronic record
systems. In almost every site, staff noted that they didnot have a system in place for ensuring accurate recordson diagnosis or treatment. No organisation could pro-duce a list of people currently being treated for depres-sion (either by a GP or via referral) other than thosecurrently prescribed antidepressants. Most agreed thatprescribing information was the only reliable informa-
tion that they recorded in a systematic way for people
with depression; yet they also stated that many patientswere not using prescription drugs for the management
of depression. The only other accurate recording ofdepression work was that obtained via the billing soft-ware for ‘structured plans of action for mental health ’
that were charged.
The current primary care environment is limited in
the extent to which a systematic approach to reflexive
monitoring can be implemented without substantialimprovement in organisational infrastructure or ongoingfinancial support. Reflexive monitoring was also seen torequire a process for reviewing the communicationpathways between GPs and others involved in depres-sion care, particularly psychologists. There was a notedlack of communication and available processes between
general practice and psychology.
At present, the schedule for patient follow-up and
monitoring is individually tailored by the individualclinician and the patient concerned. There is no sys-tematic way of ensuring that patients return for fol-
low-up, or of checking on whether they have attendedwhen referred. There is no agreement on how oftenfollow-up visits should occur. Based on the results dis-
cussed above, a system of reflexive monitoring might
also include a review of understanding of what consti-tutes depression and review of techniques for dealingwith it as a health problem. As populations change,what is considered depression may shift, and the tech-niques available to identify and manage it will evolve.Ensuring that an organisation keeps up to date withthese developments is an important part of the moni-
toring process.
Discussion
Previous studies have identified that efforts to change
organisational and professional practice are best pre-ceded by the effort to understand what is already hap-pening [26]. Without understanding the organisationalstructure and processes currently in place for depressioncare, implementing and embedding change from the
outside will be of limited success. This is confirmed bythe limited uptake of guidelines for depression manage-ment by GPs [35].
We have used data collected from six primary care
organisations to develop a conceptual framework for
implementing best practice depression care that is
informed by NPT. This theoretical approach clearlydemonstrates the existing normative and structural con-straints in current depression care practice which willnegatively impact upon the implementation of newmodels of depression care [30]. While this evidence hasbeen generated from primary care organisations basedin Australia, there are shared patterns with other inter-
national studies that have sought to implement change
in primary care [24,26,27].
Our data confirm that change at the level of the prac-
titioner through education in terventions alone is unli-
kely to facilitate much requ ired organisational and
system-level change [36]. Current mental health reformhas been focussed quite narrowly on the area wedescribe as ‘collective action ’with an emphasis on
improving individual practitioner skill-set through tar-
geted mental health education. While options haveemerged to shift the allocation of work from GPs toother health care providers like psychologists, this has
not been accompanied by adequate infrastructure toimprove communication pathways and develop ways ofworking together.
Although educational interventions to change indivi-
dual practice of doctors have shown limited success,
practice nurses are set to play a key role in depressioncare within the primary care s e t t i n g .T of a c i l i t a t et h i s
role, training in mental health care tailored to therequirements of practice nurses is needed. The Interna-tional Council of Nurses (ICN, 2008) position statementon mental health advocates for the integration of mentalhealth into nursing curriculum at basic, post-basic, and
continuing education levels. All professional nursing
bodies need to ensure that adequate education is pro-vided so that the confidence of practice nurses can beimproved.
Training of professional staff needs to be combined
with the development and implementation of informa-tion systems that can measure and report on mentalhealth indicators and outcomes. These information sys-
tems require funding and maintenance and training of
staff in how to use measures and report on these. Theuse of measurements for mental health is further com-plicated by the lack of agreement about the most appro-priate tools for detection and measurement ofdepression within the primary care setting.
The processes of achieving change requires action
across the spectrum of levels that moves fromGunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 12 of 15
individuals, the group/team, organisation to larger sys-
tem/environment [17]. This requires understanding andagreement about depression at all levels of organisa-tional and systems change. Primary care organisationsrequire adequate infrastructure from the basic level ofhaving physical team meeting spaces available to the
more complex level of information systems to support
the work. Our findings suggest that even a simple inter-vention, like introducing routine meetings about the sys-tem required to support depression care, could have farreaching benefits. Such meetings would need to addressthe constraints that require urgent attention for the rou-tine implementation of an effective model and system ofdepression care that relate to how depression and
depression work is understood , its perceived legitimacy
as a health problem, and the limited mechanisms fordealing with this diffuse phenomenon.
Our study participants held a different view of
depression and depression work to the traditionally
applied psychiatric viewpo int [37]. This suggests that
without shared agreement about what primary caremeans by the term depression, diagnosing and devel-
oping adequate treatment and management pathways
will remain difficult. Without agreement, people (staffand patients included) will not engage (buy-in) andcognitively participate in depression work and share intechniques to address the problem. There is a pressing
need to better understand the way in which physicaland emotional health is intertwined as part of thisprocess.
Patients and community stakeholders consulted as
part of our earlier re-order work have already indicatedwhat they desire in an effective model of depressioncare [18]. Embedding such a model rests on all peopleknowing the division of labour and this being alignedwith the individual and collective values of organisa-tions. Data indicated that elements of an effectivemodel of depression care existed in organisations; how-
ever, we found that this differed within each organisa-
tion and professional group. This has been identified inother research studies based in the UK to improve thequality of care for people with mental health [38]. Tofacilitate implementation, system level changes arerequired that enable people to meet, discuss, and shareinformation either face to f ace or through electronic
systems; all of which are difficult to achieve in fee-for-
service reimbursement systems. For any activity to
become a routine part of clinical work those undertak-ing it need to be convinced that the work are theydoing is worth the effort. At present the normalisedprocesses for reflexive monitoring of depression work ishighly individualised, invisible, and unsystematic. Therewill need to be considerable effort put into how tomonitor the effectiveness of any model and system of
depression care. In doing so, primary mental health careneeds to be recognised at as an operating systems in itsown right [38].
The concept of reflexive monitoring that we present in
this paper requires that practitioners have time to
review reliable, routinely collected data about their
delivery of depression care. The organisations in ourstudy were a long way from being able to undertake thismonitoring. Such monitoring requires time away fromdirect patient care to review the data, discuss the data,and devise strategies to make improvements. Currently,in a mainly fee-for-service environment, the fundingmechanism to support this aspect of depression care is
absent from the Australian primary care setting. Other
suggested mechanisms from the organisational level forreflexive monitoring included Balint-style group meet-ings. Study participants identified that this would havethe dual role of group monitoring of diagnosis andtreatment of depression whil e providing an organised
support mechanism for professional. This could assist inthe development of a culture of continuous learning
within organisations and if held as multidisciplinary.
Balint group meetings could provide a mechanism fordifferent professional groups to develop new languagesand ways to communicate across disciplinary boundariesand divisions. This is likely to require a significant levelof financial investment; particularly in information andcommunication technology. M oreover, adequate atten-
tion to all four constructs will be required not just the
development of skill-sets.
Strengths and limitations
A strength of the re-order study is the depth and detail
generated about primary care as a CAS by utilising anumber of quantitative and qualitative research meth-ods. A limitation is our involvement of organisationsfrom a practice based research network. Our findings
should be interpreted with this is mind, and it may be
that implementing change is even more complex inorganisations not interested in research. Limitations alsoexist in primary care organisations around using electro-nic health record audit dat a beyond description; the
input of data can be inconsistent and diagnostic cate-gories used within practices and by individual GPs vary.Not all organisations achieved whole of practice staff
commitment to the project. This has limited our ability
to provide psychologist ’s views on their current under-
standing and practices for depression and the futureorganisation of care. Finally, as other studies haveshown, the intensity of data collection for this researchrequires considerable resources and diversity in theresearch team.Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 13 of 15
Conclusions
Ideas about what is required for an effective model and
system of depression care i np r i m a r yc a r en e e dt ob e
accompanied by theoretically informed frameworks that
consider how these can be implemented. The concep-
tual framework we have presented has some obviousmessages, but developing each of these constructswithin the complexity of current organisational practiceshould not be underestimated. Currently, mental healthreforms have been at the level of collective action withlittle attention to building organisational capacity fordeveloping coherence and cognitive participation.
Implementation of systems a nd practices for reflexive
monitoring are some way off. The conceptual frame-work we have developed can be used beyond the orga-nisational level to develop common language aroundeach construct between poli cy makers, service users,
professionals, and researchers. This shared understand-ing across groups is fundamental to the effective imple-mentation of change in primary care for depression.
Our next step is to develop an intervention around the
use of our developed framework and to test this in arandomised controlled trial to determine the impact ofcontextually specific organised depression care onhealth outcomes.
Acknowledgements
The re-order project (2005-2008) was funded by the Australian PrimaryHealth Care Research Institute (APHCRI), which is supported by a grant fromthe Australian Government Department of Health and Ageing (DoHA). Theinformation and opinions contained in this paper do not necessarily reflect
the views or policy of the APHCRI or DoHA. The study team acknowledges
the generosity of the primary care organisations (general practices andcommunity health centres) that participated in this project by allowingintensive research data collection to occur during busy practice times. BenKillingsworth (BK) collected and compiled observational notes on thepractices. The study team also acknowledges the input of Dr John Furler in
the researcher workshop to identify a suitable theory for analysis and the
online web activity for testing out the applicability of NPT.
Author details
1Primary Care Research Unit, The Department of General Practice, School of
Medicine, The University of Melbourne, Australia.2Department of Primary
Care, School of Population, Community and Behavioural Sciences, University
of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.3Centre for Youth Mental Health, The University
of Melbourne, Australia.4Centre for Primary Health Care Studies, Warwick
Medical School, University of Warwick, UK.5Department of Sociology, School
of Political and Social Enquiry, Monash University, Australia.6Nossal Institute
for Global Health, The University of Melbourne, Australia.7Institute of Health
and Society, Newcastle University, UK.
Authors ’contributions
JG, CD, HH, FG, KH, and GB were responsible for the concept design of there-order project. JG, VP, CD, HH, FG, KH, GB, CJ and RK all contributed toanalysis and interpretation of data used within this paper. MP contributed tosubstantive data acquisition and analysis of the data for this work. VPdesigned structured activities for the meetings, was responsible for data
collection and facilitation of the organisational meetings, and completed
data analysis of transcripts with JG. HH, JG, VP, RK, MP, CJ, and arepresentative from the funding body (APHCRI) attended the final workshopto test the conceptual framework with study participants. JG developed thesynthesis of the conceptual framework presented in this paper with
intellectual contributions from all authors. All authors have read andapproved this final version of the manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 29 March 2010 Accepted: 6 August 2010
Published: 6 August 2010
References
1. WHO: The World Health Report 2001 - Mental Health: New
Understanding, New Hope. Geneva: World Health Organisation 2001.
2. Bower P, Gilbody S: Managing common mental health disorders in
primary care: Conceptual models and evidence base. British Medical
Journal 2005, 330:839-42.
3. Chalmers I, Glasziou P: Avoidable waste in the production and reporting
of research evidence. The Lancet 2009, 374(9683) :86-9.
4. Gilbody S, Bower P, Whitty P: Costs and consequences of enhanced
primary care for depression - Systematic review of randomisedeconomic evaluations. Br J Psychiatry 2006, 189:297-308.
5. Katon W, VonKorff M, Lin E, Simon G, Walker E, Bush T, Ludman E:
Collaborative management to achieve depression treatment guidelines.Journal of Clinical Psychiatry 1997, 58:20-3.
6. Katon W, Robinson P, Von Korff M, Lin E, Bush T, Ludman E, Simon G,
Walker E: A multifaceted intervention to improve treatment of
depression in primary care. Archives of General Psychiatry 1996, 53:9924-32.
7. Gunn J, Diggens J, Hegarty K, Blashki G: A systematic review of complex
system interventions designed to increase recovery from depression in
primary care. BMC Health Services Research 2006, 6(1):88.
8. Richards DA, Lovell K, Gilbody S: Collaborative care for depression in UK
primary care: a randomised control trial. Psychological Medicine 2008,
38:27-87.
9. Richards DA, Lankshear AJ, Fletcher J, Rogers A, Barkham M, Bower P,
Gask L, Gilbody S, Lovell K: Developing a U.K.protocol for collaborative
care: a qualitative study. General Hospital Psychiatry 2006, 28(4) :296-305.
10. Ijff MA, Huijbregts KML, van Marwijk HWJ, Beekman ATF, Hakkaart-van
Roijen L, Rutten FF, Unutzer J, van der Feltz-Cornelis CM: Cost-effectiveness
of collaborative care including PST and an antidepressant treatmentalgorithm for the treatment of major depressive disorder in primarycare; a randomised clinical trial. BMC Health Serv Res 2007, 7:11.
11. Patel VH, Kirkwood BR, Pednekar S, Araya R, King M, Chisholm D, Simon G,
Weiss H: Improving the outcomes of primary care attenders with
common mental disorders in developing countries: a clusterrandomized controlled trial of a collaborative stepped care interventionin Goa, India. Trials 2008, 24(9) :4.
12. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M:
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical
Research Council guidance. BMJ 2008, 337(1) :a1655.
13. Campbell M, Fitzpatrick R, Haines A, Kinmonth AL, Sandercock P,
Spiegelhalter D, Tyrer P: Framework for design and evaluation of complex
interventions to improve health. BMJ 2000, 321(7262) :694-6.
14. Michie S, Johnston M, Abraham C, Lawton R, Parker D, Walker A: Making
psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: a
consensus approach. Quality and Safety in Health Care 2005, 14(1) :26-33.
15. Michie S, Johnston M, Francis J, Eccles M: From theory to intervention:
mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants to behaviourchange techniques. Applied Psychology 2008, 57(4) :660-80.
16. NHHRC: A Healthier Future for all Australians. Canberra: National Health
and Hospitals Reform Commission 2009.
17. Ferlie E, Shortell S: Improving the quality of health care in the United
Kingdom and the United States: A Framework for Change. The Millbank
Quarterly 2001, 79(2) :281-315.
18. Palmer V, Gunn J, Kokonovic R, Griffiths F, Shrimpton B, Hurworth R,
Johnson C, Hegarty K, Blashki G, Butler E, Johnston-Ata ’Ata K, Dowrick C:
Diverse Voices, Simple Desires: A conceptual design for primary care to
respond to depression and related disorders. Fam Pract 2010, 27:447-458.
19. Miller WLM, Crabtree BF, McDaniel R, Stange KC: Understanding Change in
Primary Care Practice Using Complexity Theory. Journal of Family Practice
1998, 46(5) :369-376.Gunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 14 of 15
20. Miller WL, Reuben R, McDaniel JR, Crabtree BF, Stange KC: Practice Jazz:
Understanding variation in family practices using complexity science.
The Journal of Family Practice 2001, 50(10) :872-8.
21. Byrne D: Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences. London: Routledge
1998.
22. Reason P, Bradbury H: Handbook of Action Research. Concise Paperback ed
London: Sage Publishers 2006.
23. Patton M: Two Decades of Developments in Qualitative Inquiry: A
personal, experential experience. Qualitative Social Work 2002, 1(3):261-83.
24. Crabtree BF, Miller WL, Aita VA, Flocke SA, Stange KC: Primary Care Practice
Organization and Preventive Services Delivery: A Qualitative Analysis.
Journal of Family Practice 1998, 46(5) :403-409.
25. The DOPC Writing Group: Conducting the Direct Observation of Primary
Care Study: Insights from the process of conducting multimethod
transdisciplinary research in community practice. The Journal of Family
Practice 2001, 50(4) :345-52.
26. Crabtree BF, Miller WL, Stange KC: Understanding practice from the
ground up. The Journal of Family Practice 2001, 50(10) :881-7.
27. Cohen D, Reuben R, Crabtree BF, Ruhe MC, Weyer SM, Tallia A, Miller WL,
Goodwin MA, Nutting P, Leif I, Solberg MD, Zyzanski SJ, Jaen CR, Gilchrist V,
Stange KC: A Practice Change Model for Quality Improvement. Journal of
Health Care Management 2004, 49(3) :155-68.
28. APPC: Australian Primary Care Collaboratives. Canberra: Australian
Government Department of Health and Ageing 2010 [http://www.apcc.org.
au/faq/#Collab%20Handbook], [updated 11 March 2010; cited 11.0.10];.
29. Clark A, Holland C, Katz J, Peace S: Learning to see: lessons from a
participatory observation research project in public spaces. International
Journal of Social Research Methodology 2009, 12(4) :345-60.
30. May C, Finch T: Implementing, Embedding, and Integrating Practices: An
Outline of Normalization Process Theory. Sociology 2009, 43(3) :535-54.
31. May C: A rational model for assessing and evaluating complex
interventions in health care. BMC Health Services Research 2006, 6(86) :11.
32. May C, Mair F, Dowrick C, Finch T: Process evaluation for complex
interventions in primary care: understanding trials using the
normalization process model. BMC Family Practice 2007, 8(42) :21.
33. May C, Mair F, Finch T, MacFarlane A, Dowrick C, Treweek S, Rapley T,
Ballini L, Ong B, Rogers A, Murray E, Elwyn G, Legare F, Gunn J, Montori V:
Development of a theory of implementation and integration:
Normalization Process Theory. Implementation Science 2009, 4(1):29.
34. APA: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. Text Revision
edWashington DC: American Psychiatric Association, 4 2000.
35. Johnston O, Kumar S, Kendall K, Peveler R, Gabbay J, Kendrick T: Qualitative
study of depression management in primary care: GP and patient goals,
and the value of listening. British Journal of General Practice 2007,
57(544) :872-9.
36. Anderson RA, Crabtree BF, Steele DJ, McDaniel RR: Case Study Research:
The View From Complexity Science. Qualitative Health Research 2005,
15:669-85.
37. Gask L, Klinkman M, Fortes S, Dowrick C: Capturing complexity: The case
for a new classification system for mental disorders in primary care.
European Psychiatry 2008, 23(7) :469-76.
38. Gask L, Rogers A, Campbell S, Sheaff R: Beyond the limits of clinical
governance? The case of mental health in English primary care. BMC
Health Services Research 2008, 8:63-73.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-5-62
Cite this article as: Gunn et al .:Embedding effective depression care:
using theory for primary care organisational and systems change.
Implementation Science 2010 5:62.Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitGunn et al.Implementation Science 2010, 5:62
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/62Page 15 of 15
