KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  1 
 
 
 
Known Knowns and Known Unknowns on Behavior Change Interventions  
and Mechanisms of Action  
Martin S. Hagger1,2, Susette Moyers1, Kaylyn McAnally1, and Lauren E. McKinley1 
 
1Psychological Sciences, University of California, Merced  
2Faculty of Sport and Health Sciences, University of Jyväskylä  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note  
Martin Hagger’s contribution was supported by a Finnish Distinguished Professor (FiDiPro) award 
from Business Finland (1801/31/2015) . The authors declare no interests relating to this manuscript.  
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Martin S. Hagger , SHARPP Lab,  
Psychological Sciences , University of California, Merced, 5200 North Lake Road, Merced, CA 95343 , 
USA . Email: mhagger @ucmerced .edu 
 
Karina W. Davidson served as Editor -in-Chief for this article.  
 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  2 
Abstract  
Systematic reviews and meta -analyses play an important role in summarizing current research on the 
efficacy of behavior change interventions and their mechanisms of action. The reviews in this special 
issue represent a ‘step change’ in evaluating current e vidence on behavior change interventions and 
mechanisms. This article outlines the findings and emerging issues identified in the reviews (‘known 
knowns’), and summarizes evidence gaps to be addressed in future research (‘known unknowns’). 
Findings indicat e that tests of mechanisms of behavior change interventions are not routinely conducted 
in primary studies and research syntheses; reviews and studies do not sufficiently account for study 
quality; substantive variability exists in descriptions of interven tion content and putative mediators 
implicated in their mechanisms of action; limited data is available on the efficacy of many behavior 
change techniques; and moderators of intervention effects and mechanisms are seldom taken into 
account. Possible soluti ons include testing effects of isolated behavior change techniques and 
mechanisms of action; routine evaluation of study quality in behavioral intervention research; 
development of an evidence base linking behavior change techniques with theory -based const ructs that 
comprise mechanisms of action; adoption of fit -for-purpose methods for synthesizing behavioral 
intervention mechanisms of action; and routine testing of moderators in intervention research.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Keywords : behavior change technique ; mechanism s of action ; behavioral theory ; behavior  
change intervention ; systematic reviews  and meta -analys es; putative mediators  
 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  3 
Introduction  
Considerable epidemiologic research has demonstrated consistent links between chronic disease 
risk and behaviors  (Ford,  Zhao, Tsai, & Li, 2011 ; Li et al., 2018 ). Research in preventive medicine has 
identified behaviors that offer protection from chronic disease including ‘lifestyle’ behaviors like 
physical activity, healthy eating, not smoking , and drinking only in moderation or  not at all, as well as 
behaviors that support early detection of risk such as cancer screening or genetic testing, or promote 
effective management of long -term conditions such as adherence to medication  (Spring, Moller, & 
Coons, 2012 ). Given evidence that uptake of, and adherence to, these kinds of preventive behaviors is 
low, policymakers and resear ch funders have prioritized the development of effective behavioral 
interventions targeting population -level change in these behaviors  (Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ; Johnson & 
Acabchuk, 2018 ). The vision is the generate a substantive shift in overall behavioral patterns toward 
levels that will confer large, lasting changes in clinically -relevant outcomes and risk of chronic disease. 
Such a n approach is not only essential to manage the substantive human cost of chronic behavior -
related disease and conditions, but also critical to making future healthcare costs affordable in a 
growing, aging global population.  In this context, developme nt of optimally efficacious, effective, cost -
effective, implementable, and scalable behavioral interventions presents a grand challenge to scientists 
in the fields of social and behavioral science and allied disciplines including public health, behavioral 
and preventive medicine, and health communication  (Czajkowski et al., 2015 ; Hagger, Cameron, 
Hamilton, Hankonen, & Lintunen, 2020 ; Rothman, Kl ein, & Sheeran, 2020 ). 
While research and implementation of behavioral interventions aim ed at promoting population 
level participation in key behaviors has proliferated, it is only relatively recently that scientists have 
begun  to systematically apply knowledge derived from theor ies from the behavioral sciences in the 
development of intervent ions and develop a science  of behavior change  (Aklin et al., 2020 ; Aunger & 
Curtis, 2016 ; Michie & Johnston, 2012 ; National Institutes of Health, 2019 ). Research in this  emerging 
discipline has developed and promulgated theories and produced research ev idence on how behavioral 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  4 
interventions ‘work ’ and intervention content and methods likely to be optimally effective in evoking 
change  across multiple behaviors, contexts, and populations  (Michie & West, 2013 ). Research seeking 
to understand the mechanisms by which behavioral interventions lead to change is critical to inform this 
understa nding, and the role of theories applied from psychology, particularly those that focus on 
motivation and self -regulation, feature prominently  (Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ; Hagger, 2010 ; Hagger & 
Weed, 2019 ; Johnson & Acabchuk, 2018 ; Klein, Shepperd, Suls, Rothman, & Croyle, 2015 ; Michie & 
Johnston, 2012 ; Rothman, Klein, & Cameron, 2013 ). The role of theory is critical as it provides a 
framework to identify potentially effective intervention content and processes by which that content is 
hypothesized to change behavior , which can then be systematically tested against observations, 
alongside any auxiliary assumption and potential moderating variables  (Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ; Hagger, 
Gucciardi, & Chatzisarantis, 2017 ; Michie & Johnston, 2012 ; Rothman et al., 2013 ; Sheeran, Klein, & 
Rothman, 2017 ). It also permits the rejection of ideas which, in itself, is important to the iterative  
process of development of theories in the context of behavior change.  
However, as research on theory -based behavioral interventions has proliferated, syntheses  of 
this evidence  in systematic reviews and meta -analyse s have  become critical in order to develop a 
cumulative perspective on the intervention content that is effective in changing behavior , and the 
strength of the evidence of theory -informed mechanisms that describe how these intervention s work.  
Even synthese s have selection criteria and boundary conditions that narrow their focus, and drawing 
generalizable conclusions on effective interventions and the mechanisms involved presents considerable 
challenges to behavior al scientists as the evidence grows  (Johnson, Scott -Sheldon, & Carey, 2010 ). The 
current special issue  of Health Psychology Review  on mechanisms of health behavior change  led by the 
Science of Behavior Change (SOBC) Research Network  (Aklin et al., 2020 ; Davidson & Scholz, 2020 ) 
represents a step -change in the synthesis of quality evidence on theory -informed behavior change and 
associated mechanisms. The approach has been to conduct an ambitious series of meta -reviews and 
narrative reviews summarizing findings from extant systematic reviews and met a-analyses on behavior 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  5 
change interventions and, particularly, the theory -based mechanisms involved. This approach, the first 
of its kind, is exemplary of a collaborative effort to synthesize current research on behavior change 
interventions and associated  mechanisms, and provide an executive overview of the state of knowledge 
overall in specific fields with keen attention to key methodological artifacts that permeate the findings , 
such as quality of the reviews and constituent studies and the ways in which  theory and intervention 
content has been described and coded.  The research represents  a considerable contribution  to the field 
by providing the most up -to-date overview of behavior change research based on existing  reviews, the 
caveats and limitations of these reviews, and the gaps in knowledge that warrant future research.  
It is a privilege to offer a concluding perspective on the current special issue.  Broadly, the 
current set of meta -reviews provide the most comprehensive summary data yet on the efficac y of 
behavior change interventions and the theory -based mechanisms of change  implicated in their effects . 
The reviews summarize current knowledge on  change interventions , and highlight the limits of that 
knowledge and key emerging issues . Specifically, t hese issues include: researchers reporting behavior 
change interventions do not routinely conduct tests of the mechanisms by which the interventions  bring 
about change , and few reviewers synthesizing evidence on behavior change interventions  conduct 
analyses testing mechanism effects ; the quality of the interventions included in the reviews is sub -
optimal and reviews of intervention to do not sufficiently take study quality into account when 
assessing intervention effects; substantive variabi lity exists in the descriptions of intervention content 
(e.g., techniques of behavior change interventions) and the theory -based constructs implicated in 
mechanisms across behavioral interventions, presenting considerable challenges to synthesis  of effects  
and mechanisms tests across studies;  strong data on key behavior change techniques is limited; and 
reviews tend not to sufficiently account for the effect of moderators on intervention effects and 
mechanisms.  Here, w e provide an overview of what we see ar e the  key issues  emerging  from the 
current reviews  that contribute to knowledge on behavior change mechanisms (‘known knowns’) , and 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  6 
identify how this knowledge signposts gaps in knowledge (‘known unknowns’) that need to be the 
targets of research endeavors  by behavior change researchers going forward . 
Few Studies and Reviews Provide Strong Data on  Behavior Change Mechanisms  
An essential consideration when it comes to evaluating behavior change interventions  is a clear 
understanding of the link between the intervention content (usually a behavior change technique or, 
more commonly, a set of behavior change techniques) proposed to affect change in the behavioral 
outcome of an intervention , and the theory -based  constructs through which the intervention content is 
proposed to exert its effects  (Kok et al., 2016 ; Michie et al., 2016 ; Michie, Johnston, Francis, 
Hardeman, & Eccles, 2008 ; Michie, Webb, & Sniehotta, 2010 ). A priori knowledge of these links  is 
essential for intervention designers to put into place the design features and measures required to 
conduct analyses to test those mechanisms. It will also assist in informing the kinds of analyses that 
need to be conducted are reported in order to demonstrate these effects. Such knowledge is al so 
essential to the systematic reviewer or meta -analyst attempting to gain an estimate of the effect sizes 
and variability of the mechanisms of effect across the extant research by signalling the kinds of data 
required to provide those synthesized estimate s. Knowledge of mechanisms is also key to informing the 
development of optimally effective interventions by providing information on the kinds of strategies 
and target constructs likely to be effective in changing behaviors across contexts and populations.  
Recognition of the importance of identifying the mechanisms responsible for effects of behavioral 
intervention on behavior change was a major driver of the SOBC project and a key goal of the current 
set of meta -reviews  (Aklin et al., 2020 ; Davidson & Scholz, 2020 ). 
However, there is some  misunderstanding over the key components of mechanisms of behavior 
change and the kinds of data required in order to provide precise evaluation of how intervention work in 
changing behavior.  As a consequence, we provide a brief overv iew of the theoretical principles  behind 
the mechanisms of effect  of behavioral interventions . This is important contextual information required 
to provide an informed evaluation of the state of the extant research on mechanisms of behavior change 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  7 
interven tions based on the reviews  in the current special issue . It is also essential information required 
to inform future primary research and syntheses of research of the kinds of intervention content, design 
features, measures, and data required to provide inf ormation on mechanisms of change.  
A basic process model that summarizes the key components of a mechanism of action in 
behavior change interventions is illustrated in Figure 1.  The model outlines the key components of the 
mechanism, and, by implication, th e types of data and analysis necessary to provide evidence to test the 
proposed mechanism. The model  presented in Figure 1a depicts the effects of the content of an 
intervention  – in its simplest form, an individual behavior change method or technique such  as those 
illustrated in behavior change technique taxonomies  – on change  in a target behavior mediated by, for 
example, a single modifiable factor (e.g., a psychological construct) . Specifically, the  change technique 
is expected to affect change in  the factor  proposed  in theory  to be responsible for behavior  change ( the 
path labelled  a in Figure 1 a). The factor  is expected to affect concomitant change in the behavior  (the 
path labelled b in Figure 1 a). Together these effects comprise a mediated  or indirect  effect which is  
proposed to account for the  direct  effect of the intervention on behavior  change  (represented by path c' 
in Figure 1a). If the modifiable factor fully accounts for the effect of the technique on behavior change, 
then there will be no remaining or residual  effect of the technique on behavior change1. The direct 
effect of the technique on behavior change independent of the mediated effect represents a test of the 
efficacy of the intervention content in changing behavior (represented by path c in Figure 1b). This is 
usually the focal, and often the only, effect of interest to those evaluating an intervention. Together, 
these effects reflect the process by which the intervention is expected to work in changing behavior 
consistent with theory and together represent a mechanism of action2. 
 
1Analytically, the mechanism of action is most effectively evaluated using mediation analyses  (Hayes, 2018 ). To the extent 
that the proposed mechanism of action fully account s for the effect of the technique in changing behavior, the  indirect effect 
represented by  paths a and b Figure 1a should be approximately equivalent in size to the  direct effect illustrated by path c in 
Figure 1 b. Interested readers are directed to Hayes’  (2018 ) lucid treatment of this subject and accompanying process 
diagrams for more details.  
2It is important to be not e that the term mechanism of action  encompasses the effect of the intervention (behavior change 
technique) on behavior change through the theory -based factor. Links between behavior change techniques and modifiable 
factors (illustrated by path a in Figure 1a), and between factors and behavior change (illustrated by path b in Figure 1a), 
represent constituent parts  of the mechanism of action and not the mechanism of action itself.  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  8 
It is important to note that the illustration of the mechanism of action  likely represents a 
simplified ca se. Many techniques are proposed to affect behavior change through change in multiple  
theory -related factors or mediators , so there may be other modifiable factors mediating  the effect of the 
technique on behavior change and therefore multiple indirect eff ects (illustrated in Figure 1a by the i 
suffix alongside the modifiable factor and the a and b paths comprising the mediated effect).  To further 
add to the complexity, many interventions also comprise multiple techniques, each with their own 
mediating fact or or set of factors. This presents problems in specifying and analyzing mechanisms of 
action.  It is not possible to truly isolate the mechanism s of action of interventions comprising multiple 
techniques unless the intervention adopts a factorial design  which enables testing proposed mechanisms 
for each technique  in isolation . Overall, t he basic process model serves a dual  purpose : (i) it serves as a  
template for the  a priori specification of the  modifiable  factors or constructs that are targeted in an 
intervention (cf., putative intervention target; Aklin et al., 2020 ; Hagger, 2019a ; Nielsen et al., 2018 ), 
and expected mechanism by which the intervention is expected to ‘work’ in changing behavior , 
consistent with theory ; and (ii) provides a template for  the kinds of  measures and data necessary to test 
the proposed  mechanism of action,  and the analyses required to support  it. 
A relatively rece nt contribution to knowledge of  behavior change mechanisms has been the 
development of databases comprising expert -verified links between behavior change techniques and the 
constructs proposed to mediate their effects from multiple theories  (Carey et al., 2019 ; Connell et al., 
2018 ; Michie et al., 2017 ). Such information is extremely important as it provides researchers and 
intervention designers guidance on essential components that comprise mechanisms of action  (Byrne, 
2020 ). However, cumulative evidence from tests of mechanisms summarized in the basic process model 
is needed, and the current set of meta -reviews represent an important end eavor to  evaluate the extent of 
the current research evidence on mechanisms . Such research would be expected to contribute to the 
iterative  updating process of knowledge of the mechanisms of action of behavior change interventions.   
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  9 
However, a key finding of  the current meta -reviews is that strong cumulative evidence in 
support of  behavioral intervention m echanisms of action is relatively sparse  (Hennessy, Johnson, 
Acabchuk, McCloskey, & Stewart -James, 2020 ; Suls et al., 2020 ; Wilson et al., 2020 ). Specifically, 
only 6% of the included reviews ( k = 4) in the parent meta -review  directly examined whether changes 
in self -regul ation coincide with changes in  behavio r, that is, directly or indirectly tested the mediation 
effect representing the mechanism of action  (Hennessy et al., 2020 ). Similarly, the other  meta -reviews 
noted  an absence  of (Suls et al., 2020 ), or distinct lack  of (Wilson et al., 2020 ), mechanism tests . 
Sheeran et al.  (2016 ) provide an example of a meta -analysis that provided appropriate tests of 
mechanisms of action. The y demonstrated across experimental studies  (k = 204)  that communications 
targeting change in  attitudes, norms, and self -efficacy  resulted in changes  in health behavior  through 
changes in intention . However, approaches to testing mechanisms such as this were rare, and included 
reviews were more likely to focus on testing the effect of the intervention on the theory -based 
constructs and behavior  separately . Such tests provide evidence on mechanisms only by inference 
because the effects are tested independently  as opposed to testing the indirect effect  of the intervention 
on behavior  through constructs in a mediation analys is. 
Reasons for the lack of  evidence is attributable to  limitations in primary studies on which the 
meta -analyses included in the meta -reviews were based , as well as limitations in the meta -analyses 
themselves . Specifically, there were  relatively few interventions that included appropriate theory -based 
measures as dependent variables alongside  primary dependent measures of behavior change, and those  
that do tended not to routinely conduct the appropriate analyses  to test mechanisms of action,  or report 
sufficient data to allow secondary analyses testing mechanisms  (Hennessy et al., 2020 ; Suls et al., 2020 ; 
Wilson et al., 2020 ). In many cases, studies did not clearly specify a proposed theory -based mechanism 
for the effect of the intervention on behavior change.  It seems authors of trials of behavioral 
interventions tend to fixate on testing in tervention efficacy, that is, the effect of the intervention on the 
primary outcome (path c in Figure 1b). Often, mediation analyses to test mechanisms of action are 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  10 
generally treated as secondary or exploratory analyses, and, as a result, are often underp owered  or 
poorly conceived . 
The lack of appropriate data from individual interventions therefore, prevented  testing of 
intervention mechanisms in many of the  included meta -analyses. In addition, few of the included meta -
analyses attempted to conduct approp riate analyses on the primary data to test mechanisms of action. 
This preclude d drawing conclusions on presumed mechanisms of action based on the cumulative data 
on behavioral interventions.  Suls et al . (2020 ) provide an apt summary of the available data on tests of 
mechanisms of action : “…researchers appear to not be assessing how a  successful intervention changes 
behavior (i.e., the MoA  [Mechanisms of Action] )” (p. 26), and offer this unedifying coda on the state of 
the research syntheses on behavioral intervention mechanisms: “Two decades ago, Dusseldorp, van 
Elderen, Maes, Meulman , and Kraaij (1999 ) published a meta -analysis of studies testing the efficacy of 
interventions for CVD prevention and management, and made this sobering observation ‘…in most 
studies, programmes are described only vaguely, without explicit reference to a theoretical model or to 
empirical findings supportive of specific causal relationships between a given strategy or intervention 
and positive  effects on outcome or intermediate indicators of success. (p. 533) ’. We have to conclude 
that progress since 1999 seems modest .” (p. 30).  
So, what  research  is needed to  test mechanisms of action going forward? Primary research needs 
to provide clear a priori specification of  the theory based  mechanisms of action by which interventions 
are proposed to affect behavior change. Such a specification is necessary to inform the design of the 
intervention so that the appropriate design  features, measures, and a nalyses will be in place to enable  
subsequent tests of  those mechanisms of action. This means that researchers need to pay due diligence 
in identifying appropriate mechanisms of action based on theory  and currenty available evidence , and 
design their study  accordingly. In addition, appropriate mediation analyses and reporting of data is 
required in order to facilitate future research syntheses of tests of the mechanisms, preferably with open 
and transparent reporting of data and analyses (Hagger, 2019b ; O'Connor, 2020 ). This means that 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  11 
mediation analyses testing mechanisms of action need to be at the forefront of analyses, rather than 
secondary or exploratory analyses.  In addition, systematic reviews and meta -analyses need to  extract 
and code the appropriate data necessary to conduct appropriate analyses to test mechanisms of action. 
Specifically, this includes appropriate coding of behavior change techniques and theory -based 
constructs (mediators) to ensure intervention conte nt is appropriately pooled for analysis  (Michie & 
Prestwich, 2010 ; Michie et al., 2013 ; Michie, West, Sheals, & Godinho, 2018 ). Appropriate analyses 
also need to be conducted to test the mediation effects, such as meta -analytic structural equation 
modeling  (for applications see Cheung & Hong, 2017 ; Hagger, Chan, Proto gerou, & Chatzisarantis, 
2016 ; Hagger, Polet, & Lintunen, 2018 ; Protogerou, Johnson, & Hagger, 2018 ; Zhang, Zhang, 
Schwarzer, & Hagger, 2019 ), which accounts for the indirect effects of interventions  consistent with the 
process model o utlined previously (Fi gure 1). For example, Rhodes , Boudreau, Weman Josefsson, and 
Ivarsson  (2020 ) conducted a systematic review of theory -based physical activity interventions reporting 
each component effect of the basic process model. This enabled tests of the mechanisms of action by 
specifying  mediation of intervention effects on behavior through th eory-based mediators. Meta -analytic 
structural equation models provided support for the indirect  effects of interventions on physical activity 
through the nominated theory -based mediators using data from multiple studies. This analysis provides 
a template for future tests of mechanisms of action.  
A key barrier to the latter analyses is that many interventions encompass  multiple intervention 
techniques. This creates problems isolating effects of individual behavior change techniques and the 
theory -based cons tructs implicated  in the mechanism.  As Suls et al. (2020 ) suggest , “the continuing 
practice of testing multicomponent behavioural in terventions in aggregate ” (p. 29) hinders progress in 
testing mechanisms of action.  For example, an intervention seeking to promote physical activity  may 
comprise persuasive communications targeting attitude change, experiences of success targeting self -
efficacy change, and action planning targeting planning  change  simultaneously . This intervention is 
offered to an intervention groups and tested for efficacy in changing physical activity behavior at 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  12 
follow -up against a control or comparison group that does not receive the intervention. Such e fficacy 
tests are silent on which of the specific  techniques is causing behavior  change,  and whether they act 
independently or interactively  to produce the change. Similarly, such design s preclude meaningful tests 
of the mechanisms of action of the intervention; even if relevant theory -based mediators had been 
measured, the presence of multiple techniques in a single intervention prevents mediation analyses  that 
test the mechanisms of acti on of each technique  independently . Solutions to these issues lie in testing 
interventions that test effects of individual techniques in isolation, or the use of factorial designs which 
permit  tests of the independent and interactive effects of individual techniques, as advocated by review 
authors and commentators in the current special issue and elsewhere  (Byrne, 2020 ; Peters, de Bruin, & 
Crutzen, 2015 ; Suls et al., 2020 ; Wilson et al., 2020 ). But theses designs should also coincide with tests 
of mechanisms to explore the specific mechanisms by which isolated techniques exert their effect on 
behavior change. Such designs  would accelerate the endeavors of scientists conducting reviews to 
synthesize effectiveness of individual behavior change techniques and their mechanisms of action, and 
provide valuable contributions to the fledgling evidence base of mechanisms of action  (Carey et al., 
2019 ; Connell et al., 2018 ). However, large -scale trials adopting such designs, especially those with 
multiple intervention groups, are costly, and researchers are often reluctant to design trials using 
isolated techniques in fear of re turning null findings. Investment in such designs, is, however, very 
important if a comprehensive evidence base of mechanisms of action is to be built. Smaller -scale pilot 
and experimental trials may represent an opportunity to establish initial  formative  evidence for 
mechanisms of action.  Lobbying research funders to invest in such trials using isolated techniques and 
factorial designs would also be an important step toward developing the mechanisms of action  evidence 
base.  
Study and Review Quality  
An important theme running through the set of meta -reviews in the current special issue is the 
issue of quality, that is, the quality of primary studies included in systematic reviews and meta -analyses , 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  13 
and the assessment thereof, and the quality of the re views themselves  (Hennessy et al., 2020 ; 
Protogerou, McHugh, & Johnson, 2020 ; Suls et al., 2020 ; Wilson et al., 2020 ). The issue of quality of 
the evidence included in systematic reviews and meta -analyses has been acknowledged for some time  
(Armijo -Olivo, Stiles, Hagen, Biondo, & Cummings, 2012 ; Johnson, Low, & MacDonald, 2014 ; Moyer 
& Finney, 2005 ; Zeng et al., 2015 ), and guidelines exist advocating assessment of study quality and 
taking quality  into account when providing evaluations  (Cooper, 2017 ; Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, 
Altman, & the PRISMA Group, 2009 ; Shea et al., 2017 ), includ ing formal moderator analyses to 
establish the extent to which study quality affects conclusions  (Johnson et al., 2014 ). In the context of 
behavioral  interventions, it is therefore important that reviewers adopt appropriate means to evaluate 
study quality and conduct analyses  to test for effects of study quality . In the context of tests of 
mechanisms of action, is important that study quality assessmen ts adequately account for salient aspects 
of study design, such as use of theory and specification of mechanisms  a priori, inclusion of appropriate 
measures, conduct of appropriate analyses (e.g., mediation analyses), and transparent reporting. Such 
analys es will advance knowledge by demonstrating the extent to which elements of study design affect 
the quality of tests of mechanisms of action. It is also important that researchers conducting meta -
analyses of behavioral interventions testing mechanisms also follow quality guidelines. Reviews need 
to consider adhering to recommended guidelines for reviews on quality, such as the AMSTAR -2 
guidelines  (Shea et al., 2017 ). Results from the current meta -reviews  suggest that adoption of these 
guidelines is typically low, and there is a need to promote better awareness and application of 
guidelines to promote higher quality review evidence on behavior change  (O'Carroll, 2020 ). 
Solutions lie in stronger advocacy of ‘ good practice ’ in assessing and reporting study quality . 
For example, study quality guidelines and how to apply them should become integral to training 
programs for doctoral students. It is also important that princip al investigators  leading reviews of 
evidence on behavior change interventions  provide appropriate training on quality assessment of 
included studies and on components of quality for conducting reviews. Such advocacy will improve the 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  14 
overall the standards of published research and research syntheses, with a view to providing high 
quality tests of mechanisms in behavioral intervention . It is also important that the methods used to 
assess the quality of studies used in syntheses of evidence on behavior change interventions and their 
mechanisms are appropriate and fit -for-purpose. While  standards have been set on the conduct of 
evidence syntheses resulting in the generation of guidelines and checklists (e.g., AMSTAR -2, PRISMA, 
MARS), there is, to date, no clear standard set on methods used to evaluate study quality. Researchers 
conductin g systematic reviews and meta -analyses have tended to use bespoke tools or checklists for 
assessing study quality, which vary in the quality criteria they adopt and the scoring system used to 
produce quality scores. There have been calls for standardiz ed m ethods of quality assessment  
(Protogerou & Hagger, 2019 ), and suggestions to move away from using aggregate quality  scores 
derived from different criteria , and instead use assessments of i ndividual criteria  as independent 
moderators  (Johnson et al., 2014 ). Consensus on the section of study quality criteria  to assess therefore 
because important in this regard. For example, assessment of the quality of the techniques used  and 
reported  in behavior chan ge interventions is likely to be a priority consideration in evidence syntheses 
of these interventions (de Bruin et al., 2020 ). Such considerations need to be accounted for in the  
development of standardized methods of quality assessment specifically for behavior change 
interventions and  will advance current met hods  of study quality assessment and evaluation in  evidence 
synthese s. 
Clarity  in Definitions of Theory Constructs  and Mechanisms of Action  
A prominent theme of the current meta -reviews is the variability in definitions and 
operationalization of the theory -based constructs implicated in the mechanisms by which techniques 
from intervention impact Behavior . This should come as no surprise to psychologists,  and those from 
the other social and behavioral science s that inform theo retical mechanisms of behavior change 
interventions, given the substantive number of theories and constructs available  (Fishbein et al.,  2001 ; 
McMillan & Conner, 2007 ; Protogerou et al., 2018 ). Psychology, for example, is an extremely theory 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  15 
‘rich’ discipline, a phenomenon that poses considerable challenges to those attempting to make sense 
and synthesize findings across studies. The large number of theories mean that there are many theory 
based constructs with similar content but named differ ently (a ‘jangle’ fallacy, or d éjà-variable 
problem), and also constructs with different content that have the same label (a ‘jingle’ fallacy), both of 
which impede scientific progress by masking potential trends across studies  (Block, 1995 ; Hagger, 
2014 ). Similarly, descriptions of behavior change techniques vary considerably across studies in terms 
of the labels used and detail prov ided. The variability in definitions and descriptions make it difficult  
for researchers synthes ise findings on behavior change interventions and their associated mechanisms 
of action across studies (Abraham & Michie, 2008 ; Michie & Abraham, 2008 ; Michie & Johnston, 
2012 ). 
Solutions lie in the development of common sets of terms and language use to describe the 
content of interventions and the constructs used. Behavior change technique classifications and 
taxonomies have done much to provide a common set of descriptions for techniques used in behavior 
change interventions  (e.g., Abraham & Michie, 2008 ; Hardcastle, Fortier, Blake, & Hagger, 2017 ; 
Knittle et al., 2020 ; Kok et al., 2016 ; Michie et al., 2013 ; Teixeira et al., 2020 ). However, intervention 
designers have not readily adopted these common descriptions when specifying their interventions 
(Hennessy et al., 2020 ; Suls et al., 2020 ), which necessitates the development and application of coding 
systems to ‘translate’ descriptions of interventions into a common vernacular that  enables synthesis  
(e.g., Black et al., 2018 ; Gilinsky et al., 2015 ). The b ehavior change technique taxonomies and 
associated coding schemes  have been used to some extent in the reviews included in the current meta -
reviews, and have enabled some tests of  efficacy of intervention techniques across studies, albeit with 
the caveats outlined earlier. Recent work aimed at linking theoretical constructs with behavior change 
techniques has aimed to achieve similar common descriptions for theoretical constructs a nd their 
associated techniques  (Carey et al., 2019 ; Connell et al., 2018 ; Kok et al., 2016 ). The goal is to develop 
a database of mechanisms of action that can be used to provide better descriptions of intervention 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  16 
mechanism in primary research, and synthesis of findings on intervention mechanisms  across studies. 
However, such work is relatively new and , as findings of current set of meta -reviews attest, has yet to 
be applied in the descriptions of behavior change interventions  mechanisms in research syntheses.  
Future systematic reviews and meta -analyses aimed at estimating effect sizes for tests of theory -based 
intervention mechanisms needs to apply such coding systems , similar to those used by Rhodes et al. 
(2020 ). In addition, researchers also need to become more systematic in specifying the theory -based 
mechanisms through which they expect their behavior change interventions to work. This necessitates 
clear specif ication of  each component of the intervention using the basic model of behavior change 
mechanisms as a template. Existing (Bartholomew Eldredge et al., 2016 ; Hayes, 2018 ) and newly 
developed (West et al., 2019 ) systems for specifying links between techniques, constructs, and behavior 
that form mechanisms of action can facilitate this specification, although these should  not be merely 
descriptive , but should also have utility in, fo r example, linking the model to the analyses  necessary to 
test them . 
Limited Strong Data on  Efficacy and Mechanisms of Action for Many Behavior Change 
Techniques  
The ‘parent’ meta -review in the current special issue identified 17 behavior change techniques  
that featured prominently in the behavioral interventions reported in the included reviews  (Hennessy et 
al., 2020 ), and some of the associated reviews focused on smaller sets of techniques (Suls et al., 2020 ; 
Wilson et al., 2020 ). However,  few of the included review s conducted direct tests of the effect of the 
intervention on constructs implicated in the proposed change mechanisms  alongside changes in 
behavior, and fewer still tested the indirect effect  (e.g., Protogerou et al., 2020 ; Suls et al., 2020 ; Wilson 
et al., 2020 ). Those that did focused on a narrow set of techniques inc luding those promoting self-
efficacy, frequency of self -monitoring, and cognitive bias  training (e.g., Sheeran et al., 2016 ). In 
addition,  evidence for  intervention  efficacy and effects on constructs representing change mechanisms 
for many of the techniques in the id entified set was very limited, including self-affirmation, self -
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  17 
management, stress -management, time -management, implementation -intention interventions, self -talk, 
inhibitory/self -control training, relapse prevention/coping planning, reviewing goals, action -planning, 
and barrier identification and problem solving  techniques  (Hennessy et al., 2020 ). So, while data from 
primary studies appear to demonstrate the potential efficacy of these  techniques in changing behavior,  
meta -reviews indicated  substantive variability in effect sizes of efficacy tests across studies, and the 
quality of studies is low. Furthermore, many research syntheses use presence vs. absence analyses in 
meta -regression to evaluate efficacy of these techniques, which has inherent limitations due to 
variability in the presence of other potentially confounding or interacting techniques  (Peters et al., 
2015 ), and the presence of other techniques that co -occur across intervention and control groups that 
need to be coded or controlled for (de Bruin et al., 2020 ). 
Resolving these problems requires more sys tematic primary tests of efficacy of isolated 
behavior change techniques on behavior, or factorial designs that test main and interactive effects of 
isolated techniques, as called for by authors of the current meta -reviews and outlined in the previous 
section (Hennessy et al., 2020 ; Suls et al., 2020 ). A similar approach needs to be taken to the testing of 
the mechanisms of action involved, including the appropriate design features, measures, and analyses to 
do so. In addition, those conducting systematic reviews and meta -analyses need to also become more 
cognizant of the necessity of extracting appropriate data on mechanisms of action (e.g., tests of the 
paths proposed in the basic model of mechanisms of action, Figure 1), and the types of analyses 
required to appropriately test these mech anisms (e.g., meta -analytic structural equation modeling). 
Some reviews provide a blueprint for such analyses , such as those by  Sheeran et al.  (2016 ) and Rhodes 
et al.  (2020 ). These studies represent  the progressive designs neces sary to provide syntheses of research 
on mechanisms of action , and the current meta -reviews have highlighted that reviews adopting such 
designs are rare . 
Reviews and Meta -Analyses Do Not Routinely Account for Key Moderators .  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  18 
A noted  deficiency of the systematic reviews and meta -analyses included in the current meta -
reviews is the lack of consideration of moderators of the both the efficacy of interventions in changing 
behavior and the mechanisms involved  (Byrne, 2020 ). Key moderators flagged in the current set of 
reviews include social environmental factors and methodological artifacts.  Alcántara et al.’s  (2020 ) 
review , in particular , suggested that systematic reviews and meta analyses of behavior change 
interventions generally tended to focus on a narrow set of moderators of intervention effects including 
individual demographic factors like gender and ethnicity/race, but not occupation  and unemployment 
status , and intervention location. However, few accounted for socio -ecological and structural  factors 
such as neighbourhood characteristics  (e.g., levels of crime and violence, environmental presence of 
health -promoting factors ), rural or urban setting,  access to health care, and exposure to 
discrimination/racism . Similarly, Miller et al.  (2020 ) indicate the need to account for developmental 
factors when developing behavior change intervention given age -related changes in self -regulatory 
capacity that occur in childhood through adolescence and  into adulthood.  Finally, behavior type is a 
potentially important moderator of behavioral intervention effects, but studies seldom provide the 
necessary summary data to conduct a moderator analysis by behavior type  (Hennessy et al., 2020 ). 
Evidence for the effects of these factors on effectiveness of interventions is lacking, particularly effects 
of social environmental factors.  Reviews also flagged the importance of methodological moderators of 
behavior change intervention effects , particu larly method of delivery  (see Dombrowski, O'Carroll, & 
Williams, 2016 ; Hagger & Hardcastle , 2014 ; O'Carroll, 2020 ), intervention ‘ dose’, and experience and 
training  of those administering the intervention , but the reviews indicated  virtually no systematic 
treatment of these moderators in the included reviews  (Hennessy et al., 2020 ; Wilson et al., 2020 ). 
Solution s are the  identification,  extraction , and coding of key moderator variables as a matter of 
course when conducting systematic  reviews and meta -analyses of behavior change interventions . In the 
context of a large, expanding, and increasingly complex literatu re on behavior change interventions, the 
application of automated search methods may facilitate these processes  (Marshall, Johnson, Wang, 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  19 
Rajaseka ran, & Wallace, 2020 ). Such endeavor s will facilitate exploration of the effects of moderators 
by comparing behavior change intervention effects of behaviors across levels of the moderator  in meta -
analyses . These analyses, however, are only feasible if primary research routinely includes suitable 
measures and tests of moderator effects, and report sufficient data to permit estimation of effect sizes.  
Primary studies examining effects of behavior change interventions in minority groups and populations 
with health disparities are needed  (Alcántara et al., 2020 ). In addition, studies that test intervention 
efficacy  and mechanisms of action when other methodolog ical artifacts like delivery mode, intervention 
dose, and training level of delivery staff are varied  are also needed . Such analyses will be facilitated by 
appropriate guidelines and checklists for researchers that advocate moderator tests, and journal edi tors 
encouraging, rewarding, or even formally requiring moderator analyses in syntheses of research on 
behavioral interventions. Such cultural changes in the approach to behavior change intervention 
research  are likely to  be slow, but necessary , if an evidence base of conditional factors that magnify or 
diminish the efficacy of behavioral interventions, and their associated mechanisms of action, is to be 
developed.  
Conclusion  
The reviews reported in the current special issue provide the most comprehensive compendium 
available o f current knowledge on behavior change interventions and their associated mechanisms  of 
action . Going forward, we expect the reviews to serve as an essential, go -to resource for researchers , 
reviewers, and interventionists with a vested interest in developing and evaluating behavior change 
interventions. In this commentary  we have highlighted how the current set of reviews make an original 
contribution furthering understanding of interventio ns and mechanisms ; substantiating  the ‘known 
knowns’ in the field. These include identification of specific  techniques  known to be efficacious in 
bringing about behavior change broadly across studies on behavior change interventions , the extent to 
which co ding schemes and meta -regression analyses are used to test efficacy of specific behavior 
change techniques, the methods researchers have used in systematic reviews and meta -analyses to 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  20 
evaluate or formally test the mechanisms of action by which interventio n content ‘works’ in changing 
behavior , and the methods used to evaluate the quality of behavior change intervention research.  
More poignan tly, the current reviews also signpost the evidence gaps in, and the limitations and 
deficiencies of, extant research on behavior change intervention efficacy and mechanisms  – knowledge 
we do not know , ‘known unknowns’ , and need to  know  in order to move the field of toward the 
development of a comp rehensive  evidence base of optimally -efficacious  behavior change interventions 
and the ir mechanisms  of action . These include the lack of strong evidence of the efficacy of many 
specific behavior change techniques and their mechanisms of action, limitations  in the assessment of 
study quality, the lack of clarity in definitions and descriptions of constructs and techniques, and the 
need to routinely include measures and tests of key individual, social environmental, and 
methodological moderators of interventi on effectiveness.  
Here, we have highlighted some potential solutions to fill these knowledge gaps derived from 
the meta -reviews  and commentaries  and further afield. In particular, we advocate  (a) testing effects of  
behavior change  techniques in isolation  and adoption  of factorial designs to test  independent and 
interactive effects of techniques ; (b) advocacy of ‘good practice’ guidelines  for study quality  evaluation  
in behavioral intervention research,  and standardized tools to evaluate intervention  quality ; (c) 
continued development of databases of behavior change techniques and links with theor etical  constructs 
involved in mechanisms of action; (d) conducting  systematic reviews and meta -analyses that adopt fit -
for-purpose methods for synthesizing studies testing intervention  mechanisms of action; and (e) routine 
inclusion and coding of appropriate measures of moderators in intervention research and research 
syntheses.  Multiple programs of research from teams of researchers is required to systematically 
address each of these proposed solutions, and funders should be lobbied to resource the programs. The 
current funded line of research is a fitting exemplar of wh at can be achieved through  targeted, sustained 
investment in behavioral solutions to current health problems.  
 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  21 
References  
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in interventions. 
Health Psychology, 27 , 379 -387. https://doi.org/10.1037/0279 -6133.27.3.379  
Aklin, W. M., Stoeckel, L., Green, P., Keller, C., King, J. W., Nielsen, L., & Hunter, C. (2020). 
Commentary: National Instit utes of Health (NIH) Science of Behavior Change (SOBC). Health 
Psychology Review . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1716383  
Alcántara, C., Diaz, S. V., Cosenzo, L. G., Loucks, E. B., Penedo,  F. J., & Williams, N. J. (2020). 
Social determinants as moderators of health behaviour change interventions: Scientific gaps and 
opportunities. Health Psychology Review . https://doi.org/10.1080 /17437199.2020.1718527  
Armijo -Olivo, S., Stiles, C. R., Hagen, N. A., Biondo, P. D., & Cummings, G. G. (2012). Assessment 
of study quality for systematic reviews: A comparison of the Cochrane Collaboration Risk of Bias 
Tool and the Effective Public Health Practice Project Quality Assessment Tool: methodological 
research. Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice, 18 , 12-18. 
https://doi.org/doi:10.1111/j.1365 -2753.2010.01516.x  
Aunger, R., & Curtis, V. (2016). Behaviour centred design: Towards an applied science of behaviour 
change. Health Psychology Review, 10 , 425 -446. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2016.1219673  
Bartholomew Eldredge, L. K., Markham, C. M., Ruiter, R. A. C., Fernández, M. E., Parcel, G. S., & 
Kok, G. (2016). Planning health promotion programs: An intervention mapping approach  (4th 
ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass.  
Black, N., Williams, A. J., Ja vornik, N., Scott, C., Johnston, M., Eisma, M. C., . . . de Bruin, M. (2018). 
Enhancing behavior change technique coding methods: Identifying behavioral targets and 
delivery styles in smoking cessation trials. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 53 , 583 -591. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/abm/kay068  
Block, J. (1995). A contrarian view of the five -factor approach to personality description. Psychological 
Bulletin, 117 , 187 -215. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033 -2909.117.2.187  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  22 
Byrne, M. (2020). Gaps and priorities in advancing methods for health behaviour change research. 
Health Psychology Review . https://d oi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1707106  
Carey, R. N., Connell, L. E., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., de Bruin, M., Kelly, M. P., & Michie, S. 
(2019). Behavior change techniques and their mechanisms of action: A synthesis of links 
described in published interve ntion literature. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 53 , 693 –707. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/abm/kay078  
Cheung, M. W. L., & Hong, R. Y. (2017). Applications of meta -analytic structural equation modeling 
in health  psychology: Examples, issues, and recommendations. Health Psychology Review, 11 , 
265-279. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2017.1343678  
Connell, L. E., Carey, R. N., de Bruin, M., Rothman, A. J ., Johnston, M., Kelly, M. P., & Michie, S. 
(2018). Links between behavior change techniques and mechanisms of action: An expert 
consensus study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 53 , 708 –720. 
https://doi.org /10.1093/abm/kay082  
Cooper, H. (2017). Research synthesis and meta‐analysis: A step‐by‐step approach  (5th ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Czajkowski, S. M., Powell, L. H., Adler, N., Naar -King, S., Reynolds, K. D., Hunter, C. M., . . . 
Charlson, M. E. (2015 ). From ideas to efficacy: The ORBIT model for developing behavioral 
treatments for chronic diseases. Health Psychology, 34 , 971 -982. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000161  
Davidson, K. W., & Scholz, U. (2020) . Understanding and predicting health behavior change: A 
contemporary view through the lenses of meta -reviews. Health Psychology Review . 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1719368  
de Bruin, M ., Black, N., Javornik, N., Viechtbauer, W., Eisma, M., Hartmann -Boyce, J., . . . Johnston, 
M. (2020). Underreporting of the active content of behavioural interventions: A systematic review 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  23 
and meta -analysis of randomized trials of smoking cessation interv entions. Health Psychology 
Review . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1709098  
Dombrowski, S. U., O'Carroll, R. E., & Williams, B. (2016). Form of delivery as a key ‘active 
ingredient’ in behaviour change interventions. British Journal of Health Psychology, 21 , 733 -740. 
https://doi.o rg/10.1111/bjhp.12203  
Dusseldorp, E., van Elderen, T., Maes, S., Meulman, J., & Kraaij, V. (1999). A meta -analysis of 
psychoeducational programs for coronary heart disease patients. Health Psychology, 18 , 506 -519. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/0278 -6133.18.5.506  
Fishbein, M., Triandis, H. C., Kanfer, F. H., Becker, M., Middlestadt, S. E., & Eichler, A. (2001). 
Factors influencing behavior and behavior change. In A. Baum, T. A. Revenson & J. E. Singer 
(Eds.), Handbook of Health Psychology  (pp. 3 -17). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
Ford, E. S., Zhao, G. X., Tsai, J., & Li, C. Y. (2011). Low -risk lifestyle behaviors and all -cause 
mortality: Findings from the national health and nutrition examination survey III  mortality study. 
American Journal of Public Health, 101 , 1922 -1929. https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2011.300167  
Gilinsky, A. S., Dale, H., Robinson, C., Hughes, A. R., McInnes, R., & Lavallee, D. (2015). Efficacy of 
physical activity interventions in post -natal populations: Systematic review, meta -analysis and 
content coding of behaviour change techniques. Health Ps ychology Review, 9 , 244 -263. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2014.899059  
Glanz, K., & Bishop, D. B. (2010). The role of behavioral science theory in development and 
implementation of public heal th interventions. Annual Review of Public Health, 31 , 399 -418. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103604  
Hagger, M. S. (2010). Self -regulation: An important construct i n health psychology research and 
practice. Health Psychology Review, 4 , 57-65. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2010.503594  
Hagger, M. S. (2014). Avoiding the ‘déjà -variable’ phenomenon: Social p sychology needs more guides 
to constructs. Frontiers in Psychology, 5 , 52. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00052  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  24 
Hagger, M. S. (2019a). Basic model of a behavior change mechanism of action. PsyArX iv. 
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/9a5k6  
Hagger, M. S. (2019b). Embracing open science and transparency in health psychology. Health 
Psychology Review, 13 , 131 -136. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1605614  
Hagger, M. S., Cameron, L. D., Hamilton, K., Hankonen, N., & Lintunen, T. (2020). The science of 
behavior change: The road ahead. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton, N. Hankon en & 
T. Lintunen (Eds.), The Handbook of Behavior Change . New York, NY: Cambridge University 
Press.  
Hagger, M. S., Chan, D. K. C., Protogerou, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2016). Using meta -analytic 
path analysis to test theoretical predictions in healt h behavior: An illustration based on meta -
analyses of the theory of planned behavior. Preventive Medicine, 89 , 154 -161. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2016.05.020  
Hagger, M. S., Gucciardi, D. F.,  & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. (2017). On nomological validity and 
auxiliary assumptions: The importance of simultaneously testing effects in social cognitive 
theories applied to health behavior and some guidelines. Frontiers in Psychology, 8 , 1933. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01933  
Hagger, M. S., & Hardcastle, S. J. (2014). Interpersonal style should be included in taxonomies of 
behaviour change techniques. Frontiers in Psychology, 5 , 254. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00254  
Hagger, M. S., Polet, J., & Lintunen, T. (2018). The reasoned action approach applied to health 
behavior: Role of past behavior and test of some key moderators usin g meta -analytic structural 
equation modeling. Social Science & Medicine, 213 , 85-94. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2018.07.038  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  25 
Hagger, M. S., & Weed, M. E. (2019). DEBATE: Do behavioral interventions work in the real world? 
International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 16 , 36. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966 -019-0795 -4 
Hardcastle, S. J., Fortier, M. S., Blake,  N., & Hagger, M. S. (2017). Identifying content -based and 
relational techniques to change behavior in motivational interviewing. Health Psychology Review, 
11, 1-16. https://doi.org/10.1080/1743 7199.2016.1190659  
Hayes, A. F. (2018). Introduction to mediation, moderation, and conditional process analysis: A 
regression -based approach  (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Guildford Press.  
Hennessy, E. A., Johnson, B. T., Acabchuk, R. L., McCloskey, K., & Stewart -James, J. (2020). Self -
regulation mechanisms in health behaviour change: A systematic meta -review of meta -analyses, 
2006 -2017. Health Psychology Review . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1679654  
Johnson, B. T., & Acabchuk, R. L. (2018). What are the keys to a longer, happier life? Answers from 
five decades of health psychology research. Social  Science & Medicine, 196 , 218 -226. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2017.11.001  
Johnson, B. T., Low, R. E., & MacDonald, H. V. (2014). Panning for the gold in health research: 
Incorporating  studies’ methodological quality in meta -analysis. Psychology & Health, 30 , 135 -
152. https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2014.953533  
Johnson, B. T., Scott -Sheldon, L. A. J., & Carey, M. P. (2010). M eta-synthesis of health behavior 
change meta -analyses. American Journal of Public Health, 100 , 2193 -2198. 
https://doi.org/10.2105/ajph.2008.155200  
Klein, W. M. P., Shepperd, J. A., Suls, J., Rothman,  A. J., & Croyle, R. T. (2015). Realizing the 
promise of social psychology in improving public health. Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 19 , 77-92. https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868314539852  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  26 
Knittle, K., Heino, M. T. J., Marques, M. M., Stenius, M., Beattie, M., Ehbrecht, F., . . . Hankonen, N. 
(2020). The compendium of self -enactable techniques to change and self -manage motivation and 
behaviour v1. 0. Nature Human Behavior . https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562 -019-0798 -9 
Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., Peters, G. -J. Y., Mullen, P. D., Parcel, G. S., Ruiter, R. A. C., . . . 
Bartholomew, L. K. (2016). A taxonomy of behavior change methods: An intervent ion mapping 
approach. Health Psychology Review, 10 , 297 -312. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155  
Li, Y., Pan, A., Wang, D. D., Liu, X., Dhana, K., Franco, O. H., . . . Hu, F. B. (2018) . Impact of healthy 
lifestyle factors on life expectancies in the US population. Circulation . 
https://doi.org/10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.117.032047  
Marshall, I. J., Johnson, B. T., Wang, Z., Raj asekaran, S., & Wallace, B. C. (2020). Semi -automated 
evidence synthesis in health psychology: Current methods and future prospects. Health 
Psychology Review . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.20 20.1716198  
McMillan, B., & Conner, M. (2007). Health cognition assessment. In A. B. S. Ayers, C. McManus, S. 
Newman, K. Wallston, J. Weinman, & R. West (Ed.), Cambridge Handbook of Psychology, 
Health and Medicine  (2nd ed., pp. 260 -266). Cambridge, UK: Camb ridge University Press.  
Michie, S., & Abraham, C. (2008). Advancing the science of behaviour change: A plea for scientific 
reporting. Addiction, 103 , 1409 -1410. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2008.02291.x  
Michie, S., Carey, R., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., Kelly, M., Davidson, K., & de Bruin, M. (2016). 
From theory -inspired to theory -based interv entions: Linking behaviour change techniques to their 
mechanisms of action. European Health Psychologist, 18 , 395.  
Michie, S., Carey, R. N., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., de Bruin, M., Kelly, M. P., & Connell, L. E. 
(2017). From theory -inspired to theory -based interventions: A protocol for developing and testing 
a methodology for linking behaviour change techniques to theoretical mechanisms of action. 
Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 52 , 501 -512. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160 -016-9816 -6 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  27 
Michie, S., & Johnston, M. (2012). Theories and techniques of behaviour change: Developing a 
cumulative science of behaviour change. Health Psychology Review, 6 , 1-6. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2012.654964  
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Francis, J., Hardeman, W., & Eccles, M. (2008). From theory to intervention: 
Mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants to behaviour change techniques. Applied 
Psychology -an International Review -Psychologie Appliquee -Revue Internationale, 57 , 660 -680. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464 -0597.2008.00341.x  
Michie, S., & Prestwich, A. (2010). Are interventions theory -based? Development of a theory coding 
scheme. Health Psychology, 29 , 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016939  
Michie, S., Richardson, M., Johnston, M ., Abraham, C., Francis, J., Hardeman, W., . . . Wood, C. E. 
(2013). The Behavior Change Technique Taxonomy (v1) of 93 Hierarchically Clustered 
Techniques: Building an International Consensus for the Reporting of Behavior Change 
Interventions. Annals of Be havioral Medicine, 46 , 81-95. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160 -013-
9486 -6 
Michie, S., Webb, T. L., & Sniehotta, F. F. (2010). The importance of making explicit links between 
theoretical constructs and  behaviour change techniques. Addiction, 105 , 1897 -1898. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360 -0443.2010.03161.x  
Michie, S., & West, R. (2013). Behaviour change theory and evidence: A presentation t o Government. 
Health Psychology Review, 7 , 1-22. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2011.649445  
Michie, S., West, R., Sheals, K., & Godinho, C. A. (2018). Evaluating the effectiveness of behavior 
change techniques in health -related behavior: A scoping review of methods used. Translational 
Behavioral Medicine, 8 , 212 -224. https://doi.org/10.1093/tbm/ibx019  
Miller, A. L., Lo, S., Bauer, K. W., & Frede ricks, E. M. (2020). Developmentally informed behaviour 
change techniques to enhance self -regulation in a health promotion context: A conceptual review. 
Health Psychology Review . https://doi.org /10.1080/17437199.2020.1718530  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  28 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., Altman, D. G., & the PRISMA Group. (2009). Preferred reporting 
items for systematic reviews and meta -analyses: The PRISMA statement. PLOS Med, 6 , 
e1000097. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000097  
Moyer, A., & Finney, J. W. (2005). Rating methodological quality: Toward improved assessment and 
investigation. Accountability in Research, 12 , 299 -313. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08989620500440287  
National Institutes of Health. (2019). Science of behavior change. Retrieved July 23, 2019, from 
https://scienceofbehaviorchange.o rg/ 
Nielsen, L., Riddle, M., King, J. W., Aklin, W. M., Chen, W., Clark, D., . . . Weber, W. (2018). The 
NIH Science of Behavior Change Program: Transforming the science through a focus on 
mechanisms of change. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 101 , 3-11. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2017.07.002  
O'Carroll, R. E. (2020). Self -regulation interventions - What do we know and where should we go? 
Health Psychology Review . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1709529  
O'Connor, D. B. (2020). The future of health behaviour change interventions: Opportunities for open 
science and personality research. Health Psychology Review . 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1707107  
Peters, G. -J. Y., de Bruin, M., & Crutzen, R. (2015). Everything should be as simple as possible, but no 
simpler: Towards a protocol for accumulating evidence regarding the active content of health 
behaviour change interventions. Health Psychology Review, 9 , 1-14. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2013.848409  
Protogerou, C., & Hagger, M. S. (2019). A case for a study quality appraisal in survey studies in 
psychology. Frontiers in Psychology, 9 , 2788. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02788  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  29 
Protogerou, C. , Johnson, B. T., & Hagger, M. S. (2018). An integrated model of condom use in sub -
Saharan African youth: A meta -analysis. Health Psychology, 37 , 586 -602. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000604  
Protogerou, C.,  McHugh, R. K., & Johnson, B. T. (2020). How best to reduce unhealthy risk -taking 
behaviours? A meta -review of evidence syntheses focused on self -regulation interventions. 
Health Psychology Review . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1707104  
Rhodes, R. E., Boudreau, F., Weman Josefsson, K., & Ivarsson, A. (2020). Mediators of physical 
activity behavior change interventions among adults: A systematic review and meta -analysis. 
Health Psychology R eview . https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1706614  
Rothman, A. J., Klein, W. M. P., & Cameron, L. D. (2013). Advancing innovations in 
social/personality psychology and health: Opportunities an d challenges. Health Psychology, 32 , 
602-608. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032116  
Rothman, A. J., Klein, W. M. P., & Sheeran, P. (2020). Moving from theoretical principles to 
intervention strategies: Applying t he experimental medicine approach. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. 
Cameron, K. Hamilton, N. Hankonen & T. Lintunen (Eds.), The Handbook of Behavior Change . 
New York, NY: Cambridge University Press.  
Shea, B. J., Reeves, B. C., Wells, G., Thuku, M., Hamel, C., Moran,  J., . . . Henry, D. A. (2017). 
AMSTAR 2: a critical appraisal tool for systematic reviews that include randomised or non -
randomised studies of healthcare interventions, or both. BMJ, 358 , j4008. 
https://do i.org/10.1136/bmj.j4008  
Sheeran, P., Klein, W. M. P., & Rothman, A. J. (2017). Health behavior change: Moving from 
observation to intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 68 , 573 -600 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev -psych -010416 -044007  
Sheeran, P., Maki, A., Montanaro, E., Avishai -Yitshak, A., Bryan, A., Klein, W. M. P., . . . Rothman, 
A. J. (2016). The impact of changing attitudes, norms, and self -efficacy on health -related 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  30 
intentions and  behavior: A meta -analysis. Health Psychology, 35 , 1178 -1188. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000387  
Spring, B., Moller, A. C., & Coons, M. J. (2012). Multiple health behaviours: Overview and 
implications. Journal of Public Health, 34 , I3-I10. https://doi.org/10.1093/pubmed/fdr111  
Suls, J., Mogavero, J. N., Falzon, L., Pescatello, L. S., Hennessy, E. A., & Davidson, K. W. (2020). 
Health behaviour change in cardiovascular disease prevention and management: Meta -review of 
behavior change techniques to affect self -regulation. Health Ps ychology Review . 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1691622  
Teixeira, P. J., Marques, M. M., Silva, M. N., Brunet, J., Duda, J., Haerens, L., . . . Hagger, M. S. 
(2020). Classification of tec hniques used in self -determination theory -based interventions in 
health contexts: An expert consensus study. Motivation Science . 
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/z9wqu  
West, R., Godinho, C. A., Bohlen, L . C., Carey, R. N., Hastings, J., Lefevre, C. E., & Michie, S. (2019). 
Development of a formal system for representing behaviour -change theories. Nature Human 
Behaviour, 3 , 526 -536. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41562 -019-0561 -2 
Wilson, T. E., Hennessy, E. A., Falzon, L., Boyd, R., Kronish, I. M., & Birk, J. L. (2020). Effectiveness 
of interventions targeting self -regulation to improve adherence to chronic disease medications: A 
meta -review of meta -analyses. Health Psychology Revi ew. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1706615  
Zeng, X., Zhang, Y., Kwong, J. S. W., Zhang, C., Li, S., Sun, F., . . . Du, L. (2015). The methodological 
quality assessment tools for preclinic al and clinical studies, systematic review and meta -analysis, 
and clinical practice guideline: A systematic review. Journal of Evidence -Based Medicine, 8 , 2-
10. https://doi.org/doi:10.1111/jebm.12141  
Zhang, C. Q., Zhang, R., Schwarzer, R., & Hagger, M. S. (2019). A meta -analysis of the health action 
process approach. Health Psychology, 38 , 623 -637. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000728  
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  31 
 
KNOWLEDGE ON BEHAVIOR CHANGE INTERVENTIONS AND MECHANISMS  32 
Figure 1. Illustration of a basic model of a behavior change mechanism  of action  (Hagger, 2019a ). 
Figure 1a  represents the mediation of a behavior change method or technique on behavior change 
through change in a modifiable theory -based factor along with the residual effect of the technique on 
behavior change. Figure 1b represents the direct effect of  the technique on behavior change, effectively 
illustrating intervention efficacy in the absence of putative mediators.  
 
Behavior  
change  
Change 
method or 
technique  
Modifiable 
factor (e.g., 
psychological 
construct) i 
Mechanism of action  
Residual effect of the 
intervention unaccounted for 
by the modifiable factor 
(mediator)  
Relation between construct and behavior – 
should be experimentally verified  
Effect of method or technique on 
measure of construct – should be 
experimentally verifie d 
c' 
ai 
 bi 
Intervention  
content  
A mediator  
Behavioral  
outcome  
Behavior  
change  Change 
method or 
technique  c 
Efficacy/effectiveness of  the 
intervention  (1a) 
(1b) 
