Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cphm20
Psychology, Health & Medicine
ISSN: 1354-8506 (Print) 1465-3966 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/cphm20
Multiple outcome measures and mixed methods
for evaluating the effectiveness of theory-based
behaviour-change interventions: A case study
targeting health professionals' adoption of a
national suicide prevention guideline
A. Hanbury, L.M. Wallace & M. Clark
To cite this article:  A. Hanbury, L.M. Wallace & M. Clark (2011) Multiple outcome measures
and mixed methods for evaluating the effectiveness of theory-based behaviour-change
interventions: A case study targeting health professionals' adoption of a national
suicide prevention guideline, Psychology, Health & Medicine, 16:3, 291-303, DOI:
10.1080/13548506.2011.554561
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/13548506.2011.554561
Published online: 11 Apr 2011.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 609
View related articles 
Citing articles: 1 View citing articles 

Multiple outcome measures and mixed methods for evaluating the
eﬀectiveness of theory-based behaviour-change interventions: A casestudy targeting health professionals’ adoption of a national suicideprevention guideline
A. Hanburya*, L.M. Wallaceband M. Clarkc
aDepartment of Health Sciences, Alcuin C Block, University of York, York, UK;
bApplied Research Centre in Health and Lifestyle Interventions, Coventry University,
Coventry, UK;cNHS West Midlands Regional Development Centre, Birmingham,
West Midlands, UK
(Received 4 March 2010; ﬁnal version received 27 December 2010 )
Interest in behaviour-change interventions targeting health professionals’
adoption of clinical guidelines is growing. Recommendations have been made
for interventions to have a theoretical base, explore the local context and to use
mixed and multiple methods of evaluation to establish intervention eﬀectiveness.This article presents a case study of a behaviour-change intervention delivered tocommunity mental health professionals in one Primary Care Trust, aimed at
raising adherence to a national suicide prevention guideline. A discussion of how
the theory-base was selected, the local context explored, and how the interventionwas developed and delivered is provided. Time series analysis, mediationalanalysis and qualitative process evaluation were used to evaluate and explore
intervention eﬀectiveness. The time series analysis revealed that the intervention
was not eﬀective at increasing adherence to the guideline. The mediationalanalysis indicates that the intervention failed to successfully target the key barrier
to adoption of the guidance, and the qualitative process evaluation identiﬁed
certain intervention components that were well received by the healthprofessionals, and also identiﬁed weaknesses in the delivery of the intervention.It is recommended that future research should seek to further develop the
evidence-base for linking speciﬁc intervention strategies to speciﬁc behavioural
barriers, explore the potential of theories that take into account broader socialand organisational factors that inﬂuence health professionals’ practice and focuson the process of data synthesis for identifying key factors to target with tailored
interventions. Multiple and mixed evaluation techniques are recommended not
only to explore whether an intervention is eﬀective or not but also why it iseﬀective or not.
Keywords: behaviour change; intervention; time series analysis; mediational
analysis; process evaluation; cluster analysis; health professionals
Introduction
Evidence-based clinical guidelines are aimed at reducing variations in practice and
achieving anticipated health beneﬁts for the population. The focus on health
*Corresponding author. Email: ah537@york.ac.ukPsychology, Health & Medicine
Vol. 16, No. 3, May 2011, 291–303
ISSN 1354-8506 print/ISSN 1465-3966 online
/C2112011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/13548506.2011.554561http://www.informaworld.com
professionals’ behaviour, in the form of their adoption of these clinical guidelines, is
an important application of behaviour-change interventions due to the mediatingroles that health professionals play in inﬂuencing health outcomes of the population.Sir David Cooksey’s review of research funding in the NHS (Cooksey, 2006)
highlighted the gap in translation between evidence-based research ﬁndings and their
adoption into health care delivery. There is increasing interest in how to translateresearch-based ﬁndings into practice through enhancing health professionals’ uptakeof clinical guidelines.
To progress understanding of how best to develop and deliver behaviour-change
interventions aimed at increasing health professionals’ uptake of clinical guidelines,emphasis needs to be placed on exploring and identifying why an interventionsuccessfully increased guideline adoption, rather than simply establishing whether or
not it worked (Craig et al., 2008; Michie and Abraham, 2004).
Establishing why an intervention was successful or not requires a combination of
techniques, beyond comparing mean pre- and post-intervention scores on one ormore outcome measures. The revised Medical Research Council framework fordeveloping and evaluating complex interventions (Craig et al., 2008) has emphasisedthe usefulness of having multiple outcome measures, monitoring intervention ﬁdelityand performing process evaluations, to further our understanding of why someinterventions are eﬀective and others are not. In addition to these techniques,
mediational analyses have also been recommended (Michie and Abraham, 2004) in
theory-based intervention studies. Mediational analyses establish whether theconstructs targeted by an intervention are successfully changed, in addition to theoverall outcome measure. If a mediational analysis indicates that the targetedconstructs were successfully changed, this provides a theory-based explanation forthe eﬀectiveness of the intervention.
This article presents a case study of a theory of planned behaviour-based
intervention aimed at increasing community mental health professionals’ uptake of a
national suicide prevention guideline. We discuss how the theory-base was selected,
barriers to adherence explored, and how the intervention was systemically developedand delivered. Particular detail is provided on how the intervention was evaluated,using mixed methods and multiple outcome measures, in order to gain a deeperunderstanding of intervention eﬀectiveness and the processes behind it.
Method
The study was conducted in the Mental Health Directorate of one Primary Care
Trust (PCT) in the Midlands region of England. Eight community mental healthteams operating in the PCT were included in the study, with all qualiﬁed healthprofessionals invited to participate ( N¼93). Ethical approval for the study was
granted by Wolverhampton Local Research Ethics Committee.
The clinical guideline
The guideline was a national suicide prevention guideline. It is speciﬁed in the
Mental Health National Service Framework (Department of Health, 1999) andrequires all service-users to receive contact with a qualiﬁed community mental healthprofessional within seven days of discharge from hospital. The evidence-base is fromthe National Conﬁdential Inquiry into Suicides and Homicides in Persons with a292 A. Hanbury et al.
Mental Illness (Department of Health, 2001) which found that suicides in
community mental health patients following discharge from hospital peak in theﬁrst one–two weeks. The guideline was chosen following consultation with hospitalmanagement who identiﬁed the guideline as a concern due to low adherence levels at
the time the study began.
How the intervention was developed
Selection of theory baseThe theory of planned behaviour (TPB) (Ajzen, 1985, 1988, 1991) was selected as the
theory-base for exploring factors inﬂuencing adherence and for guiding development
of the intervention. The TPB proposes causal pathways between attitude (ATT),
subjective norms (SN), perceived behavioural control (PBC) and behaviouralintention (INT), and between INT, PBC and behaviour. Intention encompassesmotivational factors reﬂecting how hard people are willing to try in order to performthe behaviour, and is proposed as being a key mediator between an individual’sbeliefs relating to performance of a particular behaviour and their actualperformance of the behaviour. Given the causal model proposed between ATT,SN, PBC and INT, it was considered that the TPB could be used to guide
development of an intervention that targeted the health professionals’ intention to
adhere to the guideline as a way of increasing their adherence. In a systematic reviewconducted by Eccles et al. (2006), self-reported INT was found to be predictive ofclinicians’ behaviour with a medium to large eﬀect size.
Exploration of barriers to adherence
A semi-structured interview was conducted with one health professional from each
of the eight community mental health teams. Questions were designed to explore
TPB constructs in relation to guideline adherence. It was considered important tointerview at least one health professional from each of the teams, with representationfrom each of the key professional groups (community psychiatric nurses,occupational therapists, psychiatrists and social workers) because of diﬀerences interms of caseload, remit and client groups. Qualitative methods have beenrecommended by the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (2007)and the Medical Research Council (Craig et al., 2008) for exploring the local context
as part of a ‘‘diagnostic analysis’’ (Centre for Reviews and Dissemination, 1999).
Barriers identiﬁed from the interviews were used to develop a TPB survey
measuring ATT, SN and PBC in relation to adherence and self-reported INT toadhere. Indirect measures were developed as these have been recommended whendeveloping interventions due to their providing information about the underlyingcognitive foundation of the constructs (Ajzen, 2002a). The indirect measurescomprised two components each: a salient belief (all of which were identiﬁed fromthe qualitative interviews) and a multiplier, forming a multiplicative composite (see
Ajzen, 2002a and Francis et al., 2004). Table 1 provides examples of the wording of
the salient beliefs and their multipliers.
As recommended by Francis et al. (2004), the questionnaire was piloted with a
small sample of health professionals who were asked to provide feedback on therelevance and wording of the questions. The survey was then administered to allPsychology, Health & Medicine 293
community mental health workers ( N¼93) and achieved a response rate of 54%
(N¼50).
Identifying what to target with the intervention
Scores from the salient beliefs and their corresponding multipliers were multiplied
together, summed and averaged for each of the constructs. Data were analysed using
standard multiple regression to identify the combined power of ATT, SN and PBC
at predicting INT. The constructs together accounted for 58% of the variance inINT, with reference to the adjusted R
2(R2¼0.58, F (3, 6), p50.0001), a large
eﬀect size (Cohen, 1988). The standardised bcoeﬃcients were examined to identify
the relative weight of the predictors in the regression equation. Subjective normswere found to be the only signiﬁcant predictor of INT ( t¼6.622, p50.001). To
enable greater tailoring of the intervention to the underlying beliefs that mostsigniﬁcantly inﬂuence health professionals’ adherence, a subsidiary analysis
recommended by Francis et al. (2004) was performed. Participants were divided
into two groups: a higher average intention group (INT scores of 6 or more, N¼26)
and a lower average intention group (INT scores of 5 and below, N¼24). Mean
scores from SN items were compared across the two groups using independentsamples t-tests. All but one of the items signiﬁcantly diﬀerentiated between thoseTable 1. Wording of salient beliefs and their multipliers.
Example of salient belief items for
each constructExample of corresponding multiplier items for
each construct
Example of behavioural belief item
(ATT construct)Example of corresponding outcome evaluation
item (ATT construct)
My making seven-day contacts for all
service-users may reduce the risk of
suicide for some (Strongly disagree
to strongly agree)Relative to the other obligations I have, reducing
the risk of suicide for some service-users is (Low
priority to high priority)
Example of normative belief item
(SN construct)Example of corresponding motivation to comply
item (SN construct)
Staﬀ from my team make seven-day
contacts for all service-users(Strongly disagree to stronglyagree)How important is it to do what staﬀ from your
team do? (Not at all important to veryimportant)
Example of control belief item (PBC
construct)Example of corresponding power item (PBC
construct)
If you have a diﬃcult to manage
caseload, does this make it more or
less likely that you will be able to
make seven-day contacts for allservice-users?’ (Very much more
likely to very much less likely)How often do you have a diﬃcult to manage
caseload? (Not at all to all the time)
Example of intention item (INT
construct)
In the forthcoming months, I plan to
make seven-day contacts for all
service-users (strongly disagree tostrongly agree)
Note: All items were rated on seven-point Likert response scales.294 A. Hanbury et al.
with higher versus lower INT scores (Table 2). The intervention was designed to
target these signiﬁcant normative beliefs, which included perceptions of theexpectations of team members and management.
Intervention development and delivery
An educational session was chosen as the most feasible type of intervention due to
constraints on staﬀ time identiﬁed in the interviews and the literature. Commonconstraints, including limited availability of health professionals’ time (Gerrish andClayton, 2004) and lack of speciﬁc budgets available for intervention eﬀorts(Grimshaw et al., 2004; Whitty, Thomas, & Grimshaw, 2004) need to be takeninto account when developing and delivering interventions as failure to do so may
lead to interventions that appear well designed, yet are not feasible. To increase
accessibility, the intervention was delivered separately to each of the teams at theirteam bases.
A technique representing step 2 in the six-stage intervention mapping framework
(Bartholomew, Parcel, & Kok, 1998), which recommends selecting theory-basedmethods and translating these into practical implementation strategies, was used todevelop the intervention. The normative beliefs were listed, with the interventiondesigned to target each of them. In addition to including recommended interactive
elements in the intervention (Davis et al., 1999; Grol & Grimshaw, 2003; Richens,
Rycroft-Malone, & Morrell, 2004), literature was reviewed focusing on implementa-tion strategies that could be used to speciﬁcally target normative beliefs. Strategiesidentiﬁed included academic detailing and peer discussion, both characterised asmaking medium to high use of both knowledge and information transfer and thetransmission of norms and values (Mittman, Tonest, & Jacobson, 1992). Regarding
Table 2. Mean scores for normative beliefs: Comparing high versus low intention groups.
Normative belief itemMean for low
intention
group (SD)Mean for high
intention
group (SD)Signiﬁcance
(Cohen’s d
eﬀect size)
Most people in my team make seven
day contacts for all service-users28.27 (13.21) 35.79 (12.75) p¼0.05 (0.6)
Most people in my team expect me to
make seven-day contacts for all
service-users19.20 (10.94) 37.72 (11.20) p¼0.0001 (1.7)
Management expect me to make
seven-day contacts for all service-
users24.65 (13.79) 42.67 (8.40) p¼0.0001 (1.3)
The Care Programme Approach
oﬃce expects me to make seven-
day contacts for all service-users24.35 (12.67) 36.92 (13.00) p¼0.001 (1.0)
The government expect me to make
seven-day contacts for all service-users28.33 (11.06) 34.29 (12.40) p¼0.08 (0.5)
Staﬀ of a high status make seven-day
contacts for all service-users16.15 (8.43) 25.69 (12.78) p¼0.0001 (0.7)
Note: Normative beliefs were scored on a 1–7 Likert scale and multiplied by motivation to comply items
scored on a 1–7 Likert scale: item means can range between 1 and 49.Psychology, Health & Medicine 295
academic detailing, Mittman et al. (1992) suggested ‘‘an eﬀective detailer
provides subtle, implicit or explicit suggestions to the target regarding theinappropriateness ...o f t h e target’s current practices and the acceptability of the
suggested alternative practices’’ (p. 417). Peer discussion has been used by other
researchers (Verstrappen et al., 2003) and suggested as beneﬁcial in providing health
professionals with an opportunity to discuss practice and learn from each other.
Intervention component one: presentation containing persuasive message
The presentation was designed to summarise the evidence-base of the guideline, and
to convey that all staﬀ identiﬁed as important from the subsidiary analysis valueadherence to the guideline and expect others to adhere. The presentation contained
factual information summarised as graphs and statements taken from key
Department of Health publications documenting the guideline evidence-base. Aseries of anonymised quotes from local health professionals in the exploratoryinterviews were presented alongside the graphs, for example, ‘‘I think there’s aculture within our team that its an important process. . .anyone of us would challengeanyone else in the team if it wasn’t done’’ (comment made by an occupationaltherapist). It was emphasised throughout the presentation that all staﬀ adhere andexpect others to adhere because the guideline has a strong evidence-base and not
adhering may place service-users at unnecessary risk.
Intervention component two: Facilitated group discussion
The group discussion was included as an interactive element to enable the sharing of
practice and ideas. The discussion was facilitated by the training coordinator whoused persuasive communication; making explicit suggestions that the guideline isimportant, is considered important by all staﬀ, and that there is an expectation that
all staﬀ will adhere.
Intervention component three: Vignettes
The vignettes depicted an episode of care where the guideline was adhered to and
avoided a near-miss, and an episode where the guideline was not adhered to andresulted in a negative outcome for a patient. The vignettes were developed by theprofessional head of nursing to reﬂect commonly occurring scenarios in clinical
practice relating to the guideline. The health professionals worked in small groups,
sharing their discussions at the end of the session, facilitated by the trainingcoordinator. The training coordinator summarised the discussions in terms of theimportance of the guideline and how adhering in one vignette avoided a near miss,and how not adhering in the other resulted in a negative outcome that could havebeen avoided.
The three components were combined into a single educational session,
representing step 3 in the intervention mapping framework (Bartholomew et al.,
1998). The intervention was delivered by an experienced training coordinator of the
primary care trust, known to the health professionals and a qualiﬁed mental healthnurse. It was expected that this would oﬀer greater credence to the intervention sinceMittman et al. (1992) suggest that failure to use educators known to the healthprofessionals is one reason why interventions aimed at achieving social inﬂuence fail296 A. Hanbury et al.
to work. The lead author attended each of the sessions to monitor delivery of the
three core components as a ﬁdelity measure.
Evaluation of intervention eﬀectiveness
Three techniques were used to evaluate and to develop a deeper understanding of
intervention eﬀectiveness.
(1)Evaluation one: time series analysis of routinely collected audit data
summarising health professionals’ monthly rates of adherence to the guidelinebefore, during and after delivery of the intervention . An interrupted time series
analysis was applied to the monthly percentage adherence rates to determine
whether the intervention was followed by a signiﬁcant increase in adherence,
having controlled for other possible inﬂuences. This evaluation measureenabled assessment of the overall impact of the intervention upon adherencelevels. Twenty-seven pre-intervention and 18 post-intervention data pointswere entered into the analysis.
(2)Evaluation two: mediational analysis comparing before and after scores across
each of the TPB constructs . The survey was re-administered and pre- and
post-intervention scores compared across each of the TPB constructs.
Interest was focussed on whether the targeted SN score was higher after
delivery of the intervention compared with before.
(3)Evaluation three: qualitative process evaluation interviews . Qualitative inter-
views were conducted with a small sample of health professionals whoattended the intervention, as well as with PCT facilitators who wereresponsible for monitoring guideline adherence. The interviews targeted thethird element of a proposed process evaluation for interventions (Hulscher,Laurant, & Grol, 2003), exploring the experience of those exposed to the
intervention. Interview questions covered what participants perceived to be
the main message behind the intervention, what they learnt from it, what theyfelt had been most inﬂuential, and how they felt the intervention could havebeen improved. Content analysis was used to analyse the interviews, withcomments relating to each of the interview questions noted and relatedcomments grouped together to arrive at a set of separate comments undereach of the category headings.
Results
Evaluation one
Autoregressive Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) modelling was used to
identify and control for all non-random patterns in the data (autocorrelation,integration and moving average), before testing the signiﬁcance of the interventionupon percentage adherence rates. Referring to the integration component, a
signiﬁcant upwards trend in the data was evident, indicating that adherence levels
had increased gradually during the course of the research, and so the data series wasdiﬀerenced once to achieve a stationary mean. Examination of ACF and PACFfunction plots was performed on the pre-intervention data points to look forevidence of autocorrelation and to ascertain the order of the moving averagePsychology, Health & Medicine 297
component: the plots suggested no autocorrelation and a moving average of order 1.
Thus, an ARIMA (0, 1, 1) model was applied to the entire data series. It was foundthat the intervention did not have a signiﬁcant impact on adherence ( p40.05,
R
2¼0.27). For a full discussion of the analysis and ﬁndings, please refer to
Hanbury, Wallace, and Clark (2009).
Evaluation two: mediational analysis
Of the 28 health professionals who returned the post-intervention survey, 17 had
completed the pre-intervention survey and attended the intervention; only these 17were included in the analysis. The sample represented responses from each of theeight community mental health teams, those with experience of working in health
care spanning 0–25 years or more (model group: 10–14 years, N¼6) and the age
range 18–65 (modal group 25–34 years, N¼7). Table 3 summarises the before and
after scores for ATT, SN, PBC and INT, which were compared using paired sampledt-tests. Only scores of PBC were found to be signiﬁcantly higher (more positive) after
the intervention, t¼2.429, df ¼16,p50.027, a medium eﬀect size (0.6) (Cohen,
1988). However, after Bonferroni adjustment to control for family error rate, theprobability level is higher than the Bonferroni adjusted probability level ( p¼0.05/
4¼0.01) suggesting the diﬀerence not to be signiﬁcant.
Evaluation three: qualitative process evaluation
Three community psychiatric nurses (one male and two females), and two primary
care trust facilitators who were responsible for monitoring adoption of the targetedguideline, were interviewed. All three community psychiatric nurses had attended theintervention; however, only one of them had returned the post-intervention survey.
The main messages from the intervention were perceived to be that the guideline
is PCT mandatory, and that it is better to make seven-day contacts for all service-
users rather than only those considered high risk due to the risk of relapse. Thissuggests that the presentation component of the intervention, which providedinformation on the guideline evidence-base, may have had some impact, in particularthe statistics that were summarised:
It showed in the training session that its better for everybody, because even the sort of
slightest relapse can be identiﬁed in that seven-days and stop them needing furtherinterventions or rushing into hospital, so I think before the training session you would
Table 3. Before and after scores for TPB constructs.
ConstructMean score (SD)
pre-interventionMean score (SD)
post-interventionSigniﬁcance
(Cohens’ deﬀect size)
ATT 32.55 (9.06) 33.27 (11.54) p¼0.80 (0.06)
SN 29.78 (9.23) 30.88 (9.29) p¼0.76 (0.12)
PBC 17.98 (2.71) 20.95 (5.34) p¼0.03 (0.56)
INT 5.87 (1.06) 5.88 (1.49) p¼0.84 (0.2)
Note: Salient beliefs for each construct were scored on a 1–7 Likert scale and the corresponding multipliers
were scored on a 1–7 Likert scale: item means can range between 1 and 49.298 A. Hanbury et al.
think that perhaps it’d only be people that are high risk, but I think it highlighted that
its useful for everyone. (Community psychiatric nurse)
More positive perceptions of management support for the guideline were also
discussed:
Its easy to knock management but they want good care to be provided at the same time
as everyone else. . .I think for genuine reasons. (Community psychiatric nurse)
When asked which component of the intervention was most inﬂuential, all
participants mostly valued the facilitated group discussion, which provided anopportunity for the health professionals to reﬂect on practice, voice their opinions
and raise any issues:
The discussion followed on from the presentation and I think people, not only voiced
their opinion but also voiced what to them was preventing them doing it, they brought
their thoughts and anger. (Michelle – facilitator)
Issues concerning responsibility for making seven-day contacts emerged during the
interviews, with the suggestion that ward staﬀ create a barrier to adherence through
not communicating discharge dates with community teams. It was commented by
Michelle (a PCT facilitator) that ward staﬀ should have attended the intervention,with this suggested as an improvement that could be made to the intervention:
I don’t think there was across the board attendance at all, I do think once again there’s a
shortage of ward staﬀ there because, my feelings with seven-day contacts, the ward staﬀalways feel its up to the community staﬀ, its not a partnership, the ward staﬀ are not
telling them that people have been discharged. (Michelle – facilitator)
Discussion
This article has provided a case study of a behaviour-change intervention targeting
community mental health professionals’ uptake of a clinical guideline. Addressingthe criticism that intervention reports typically fail to provide adequate detailregarding intervention design and delivery, and incorporating recommendations bythe Medical Research Council (Craig et al., 2008) for more studies exploring why
interventions have been more or less eﬀective through use of diﬀerent techniques and
outcome measures, this article has detailed the multiple, mixed method techniquesemployed to evaluate and understand intervention eﬀectiveness.
Routinely collected audit adherence data supplied by the PCT indicated that
there was a clear increase in adherence to the guideline throughout the duration ofthe research. However, it is not possible to attribute this increase in adherence to theeﬀects of the intervention as when this underlying upwards trend in adherence wascontrolled for in the time series analysis (evaluation one), the intervention was not
found to have a signiﬁcant impact on adherence levels above this underlying trend.
The mediational analysis (evaluation two) further found that the intervention wasnot eﬀective at increasing the targeted SN construct of the TPB. Finally, theinterview ﬁndings that enabled a process evaluation (evaluation three) suggest thatcertain components of the intervention were well received by participants, inPsychology, Health & Medicine 299
particular the facilitated group discussion, yet also highlighted possible weaknesses
of the intervention, notably the lack of attendance of ward staﬀ compared withcommunity mental health professionals.
The ﬁrst possible explanation for the ﬁndings of this study are that the
intervention did not include the most eﬀective components, either in its design or
delivery, to successfully change SN. This suggestion is based on the ﬁnding from themediational analysis – (evaluation two) – that SN was not signiﬁcantly higher post-intervention. Literature was reviewed to identify implementation strategies andtechniques that could target SN, and a systematic approach to interventiondevelopment was employed, guided by Bartholomew et al.’s intervention mappingapproach. However, to date there is still limited evidence available to guideresearchers in selecting the most appropriate implementation strategies to target the
most inﬂuential constructs identiﬁed from a diagnostic analysis. There is also limited
evidence available to guide decisions over what dose of the intervention is needed; asingle session of the educational intervention, however well designed, may not havebeen an adequate dose to achieve sustainable behaviour-change. The inclusion of theprocess evaluation measure (evaluation three) enabled exploration of the healthprofessionals’ perceptions of which intervention components were more and lesssuccessful. The ﬁnding that the facilitated group discussions were considered to beeﬀective is valuable for future interventions targeting health professionals’ adoption
of clinical guidance. Similarly, the ﬁnding that a particular barrier to adherence was
considered to be neglected by the intervention: communication of discharge datesbetween ward- and community-based teams, gives insight into a possible short-coming of the intervention. This barrier was identiﬁed from the qualitativeinterviews conducted during the diagnostic analysis and was developed into a singlePBC item in the survey; however, due to only SN being identiﬁed as a signiﬁcantpredictor, this potentially highly inﬂuential barrier to adherence was overlooked.This is an important ﬁnding from the process evaluation and suggests that overly
prescriptive use of theories can lead to possibly important factors being overlooked,
and supports the recommendation made by Hanbury, Thompson, and Mannion (inpress) that greater attention needs to be paid to the process of data synthesis in thedevelopment of behaviour-change interventions.
The second possible issue to consider as an explanation for why the intervention
was not eﬀective is whether the TPB is the most appropriate theory to use to guideintervention development. The TPB was selected due to it having been used inprevious studies of professional behaviour, and due to the causal model it proposes
between ATT, SN, PBC and INT, and between INT and behaviour. Analysis of the
survey data found the model to account for 58% of the variance in healthprofessionals’ INT to adhere; comparable or higher than found in previous researchwith health professionals (Puﬀer & Rashidian, 2004; Walker, Grimshaw, &Armstrong, 2001). The high proportion of variance accounted for suggests thatthe TPB has potential as a framework for guiding a diagnostic analysis (Centre forReviews and Dissemination, 1999) of the barriers to adopting clinical guidelines. TheEccles and The Improved Clinical Eﬀectiveness through Behavioural Research
Group (2006), however, cite the TPB as an example of a theory that is focussed on
the behaviour of individual clinicians and suggest it not to be appropriate in contextswhere, for example, broader issues may inﬂuence guideline adoption rather thansolely health professionals’ attitudes and motivation. Indeed, growing consensus hasdeveloped that health professionals’ behaviour and subsequent behaviour-change300 A. Hanbury et al.
can be inﬂuenced by factors at a number of levels; Hagger (2009), Craig et al. (2008)
and Grol, Bosch, Hulscher, Eccles, and Wensing (2007), for example, emphasise theimportance of understanding the individual, as well as wider social and environ-mental inﬂuences upon behaviour. Therefore, it is possible that constructs such as
ATT, SN and PBC are important in inﬂuencing health professionals’ adoption of
guidelines, but that broader and higher level constructs, such as organisationalculture, are also important to consider when trying to change professionalbehaviour.
A signiﬁcant limitation of this study is the increasing attrition through the
sequential phases (pre-intervention survey, participation in the intervention, andpost-intervention survey), which led to a small sample size for evaluation two. Stepswere taken to increase the response rate of the survey, for example, with second
copies of the questionnaire sent to non-responders, and a monetary prize oﬀered to
the teams with the highest response rate. The intervention was also designed to beaccessible to the health professionals, and the research was well publicised. The highattrition in this study is likely to be common to sequential, longitudinal research inhealth services settings, with staﬀ rotation, turnover and workload issues presentingdiﬃculties. Acceptable baseline measures of the TPB constructs were, however,achieved with a response rate of 50% for the pre-intervention administration of thesurvey; with baseline measures sometimes entirely missing from theory-based process
evaluations (e.g. Ramsay, Thomas, Croal, Grimshaw, & Eccles, 2010). Furthermore,
the robustness of the study has been strengthened by using multiple and mixedevaluation measures through inclusion of audit adherence data (evaluation one) andthe qualitative process evaluation (evaluation three).
This study has demonstrated the strength of using multiple and mixed methods
of evaluation to provide richer information to help develop an understanding ofintervention eﬀectiveness. It is suggested that future research continue to strengthenthe evidence-base for guiding selection of speciﬁc strategies to target speciﬁc
constructs, and focus on exploring theories that consider a broader range of factors
inﬂuencing health professionals’ adoption of guidance. We further suggest thatfuture research should consider the process of data synthesis following explorationof the local context, to ensure that all important factors inﬂuencing adherence aretargeted by behaviour-change interventions.
References
Ajzen, I. (1985). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behaviour. In J. Kuhl & J.
Beckman (Eds.), Action-control: From cognition to behaviour (pp. 11–39). Berlin: Springer-
Verlag.
Ajzen, I. (1988). Attitudes, personality and behaviour . Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behaviour. Organizational Behaviour and Human
Decision Processes ,50, 179–211.
Ajzen, I. (2002a). Constructing a TPB questionnaire: Conceptual and methodological
considerations . Retrieved January 19, 2010, from http:/www-unix.oit.umass.edu/ *ajzen/
Bartholomew, L.K., Parcel, G.S., & Kok, G. (1998). Intervention mapping: A process for
developing theory and evidence based health education programs. Health Education and
Behaviour ,25(5), 545–563.
Centre for Reviews, Dissemination. (1999). Getting evidence into practice. Eﬀective Health
Care 1999 ,5(1), 1–16.
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioural sciences . Hillsdale, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Psychology, Health & Medicine 301
Cooksey, D. (2006). A review of UK health research funding . London: The Stationary
Oﬃce.
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Pettigrew, M. (2008). Complex
Interventions Guidance , Medical Research Council. Retrieved December 16, 2009, from
http://www.mrc.ac.uk/Utilities/Documentrecord/index.htm?d ¼MRC004871
Davis, D., Thompson, M.A., Freemantle, N., Wolf, F.M., Mazmanian, P., & Taylor-Vaisey,
A. (1999). Impact of formal continuing medical education: Do conferences, workshops,rounds and other traditional continuing education activities change physician behaviouror health care outcomes? JAMA ,282(9), 867–874.
Department of Health. (1999). National service framework for mental health: Modern standards
and service models . London: Department of Health.
Department of Health. (2001). Safety ﬁrst: Five year report of the national conﬁdential inquiry
into suicide and homicide by people with mental illness . London: The Stationary Oﬃce.
Eccles, M.P., Hrisos, S., Francis, J., Kaner, E.F., Dickinson, H.O., Beyer, F., & Johnston, M.
(2006). Do self-reported intentions predict clinician’s behaviour: A systematic review.Implementation Science ,1, 28, doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-1-28.
Eccles, M. & The Improved Clinical Eﬀectiveness through Behavioural Research Group.
(2006). Designing theoretically-informed implementation interventions. Implementation
Science ,1, 4, doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-1-4.
Francis, J.J., Eccles, M.P., Johnston, M., Walker, A., Grimshaw, J., Foy, R., . . . Bonetti, D.
(2004). Constructing questionnaires based on the theory of planned behaviour: A manual
for Health. Centre for Health Services Research: Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom.Retrieved June 14, 2008, from http://www.rebeqi.org/ViewFile.aspx?itemID=212 .
Gerrish, K., & Clayton, J. (2004). Promoting evidence-based practice: An organizational
approach. Journal of Nursing Management ,12, 114–123.
Grimshaw, J.M., Thomas, R.E., Maclennan, G., Fraser, C., Ramsay, C.R., Vale, L., . . .
Donaldson, C. (2004). Eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency of guideline dissemination and
implementation strategies. Health Technology Assessment ,8,6 .
Grol, R., & Grimshaw, J. (2003). From best evidence to best practice: Eﬀective
implementation of change in patients’ care. The Lancet ,362(9391), 1225–1230.
Grol, R.P.T.M., Bosch, M.C., Hulscher, M.E.J.L., Eccles, M.L., & Wensing, M. (2007).
Planning and studying improvement in patient care: The use of theoretical perspectives.
The Millbank Quarterly ,85(1), 93–138.
Hagger, M.S. (2009). Theoretical integration in health psychology: Unifying ideas and
complementary explanations. British Journal of Health Psychology ,14, 189–194.
Hanbury, A., Thompson, C., & Mannion, R. (in press). Statistical synthesis of contextual
knowledge to increase the eﬀectiveness of theory-based behaviour change interventions.Journal of Health Services Research and Policy .
Hanbury, A., Wallace, L., & Clark, M. (2009). Use of a time series design to test eﬀectiveness
of a theory-based intervention targeting adherence of health professionals to a clinicalguideline. British Journal of Health Psychology ,14, 505–518.
Hulscher, M.E.J.L., Laurant, M.G.H., & Grol, R.P.T.M. (2003). Process evaluation on
quality improvement interventions. Quality and Safety in Health Care ,12, 40–46.
Michie, S., & Abraham, C. (2004). Interventions to change health behaviours: Evidence based
or evidence inspired? Psychology and Health ,19(1), 29–49.
Mittman, B.S., Tonest, X., & Jacobson, P.D. (1992). Implementing clinical practice guidelines:
Social inﬂuence strategies and practitioner behaviour change. QRB ,18, 413–422.
National Institute for Health, Clinical Excellence. (2007). Behaviour Change at Population,
Community and Individual Levels (Public Health Guidance 6). London. Retrieved
December 16, 2009, from http://www.nice.org.uk/PH6
Puﬀer, S., & Rashidian, A. (2004). Practice nurses intentions to use clinical guidelines. Journal
of Advanced Nursing ,47(5), 500–509.
Ramsay, C.R., Thomas, R.E., Croal, B.L., Grimshaw, J.M., & Eccles, M.P. (2010). Using the
theory of planned behaviour as a process evaluation tool in randomised trials of
knowledge translation strategies: A case study from UK primary care. Implementation
Science ,5, 71.
Richens, Y., Rycroft-Malone, J., & Morrell, C. (2004). Getting guidelines into practice: A
literature review. Nursing Standard ,18(50), 33–40.302 A. Hanbury et al.
Verstappen, W.H.J.M., Van Der Weijden, T., Sijbrandij, J., Smeele, I., Hermsen, J.,
Grimshaw, J., & Grol, R.P.T.M. (2003). Eﬀect of a practice-based strategy on test
ordering performance of primary care physicians. JAMA ,289, 18.
Walker, A.E., Grimshaw, J.M., & Armstrong, E.M. (2001). Salient beliefs and intentions to
prescribe antibiotics for patients with a sore throat. British Journal of Health Psychology ,
6, 347–360.
Whitty, P., Thomas, R., & Grimshaw, J. (2004). Disseminating and implementing guidelines:
How feasible is it? Clinical Governance :An International Journal ,9(1), 8–10.Psychology, Health & Medicine 303
