Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: 1743-7199 (Print) 1743-7202 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Facilitating progress in health behaviour theory
development and modification: the reasoned
action approach as a case study
Katharine J. Head & Seth M. Noar
To cite this article:  Katharine J. Head & Seth M. Noar (2014) Facilitating progress in health
behaviour theory development and modification: the reasoned action approach as a case
study, Health Psychology Review, 8:1, 34-52, DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2013.778165
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2013.778165
Published online: 18 Mar 2013.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 4114
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 16 View citing articles 

Facilitating progress in health behaviour theory development and
modiﬁcation: the reasoned action approach as a case study
Katharine J. Headaand Seth M. Noarb+
aDepartment of Communication, University of Kentucky, 124 Grehan Journalism Building,
Lexington, KY 40506-0042, USA;bSchool of Journalism and Mass Communication and
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 363
Carroll Hall (CB 3365), Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3365, USA
(Received 26 July 2012; ﬁnal version received 18 February 2013 )
This paper explores the question: what are barriers to health behaviour theory
development and modification, and what potential solutions can be proposed? Using
the reasoned action approach (RAA) as a case study, four areas of theorydevelopment were examined: (1) the theoretical domain of a theory; (2) tensionbetween generalisability and utility, (3) criteria for adding/removing variables in a
theory, and (4) organisational tracking of theoretical developments and formal
changes to theory. Based on a discussion of these four issues, recommendationsfor theory development are presented, including: (1) the theoretical domain fortheories such as RAA should be clarified; (2) when there is tension between
generalisability and utility, utility should be given preference given the applied
nature of the health behaviour field; (3) variables should be formally removed/amended/added to a theory based on their performance across multiple studies
and (4) organisations and researchers with a stake in particular health areas may
be best suited for tracking the literature on behaviour-specific theories andmaking refinements to theory, based on a consensus approach. Overall,enhancing research in this area can provide important insights for more
accurately understanding health behaviours and thus producing work that leads
to more effective health behaviour change interventions.
Keywords: health behaviour theory; theory development; theory of reasoned
action
Over the last four decades, researchers have developed a number of individual-level
health behaviour theories (HBT) to understand and predict health behaviours.Reviews suggest that the most frequently used theories in the field are the
transtheoretical model (TTM) and stages of change, social cognitive theory (SCT),
the health belief model (HBM), the theory of reasoned action (TRA), and thetheory of planned behaviour (TPB) (Glanz & Bishop, 2010; Painter, Borba, Hynes,
Mays, & Glanz, 2008). The latter two HBTs stem from what has recently been
labelled the reasoned action approach (RAA); this approach includes the TRA,TPB and the most recent development in this line of research, the integrated
behavioural model (IBM; Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010). In addition to the TTM, SCT
and HBM, these theories that make up the RAA have been widely used for the
*Corresponding author. Email: noar@email.unc.eduHealth Psychology Review, 2014
Vol. 8, No. 1, 34 /C152, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2013.778165
#2013 Taylor & Francis
purposes of explaining and predicting a variety of health behaviours (Albarracı ´n,
Johnson, Fishbein, & Muellerleile, 2001 ; Blue, 1995 ; Montan ˜o, Selby, Somkin,
Bhat, & Nadel, 2004). Additionally, all the theories mentioned above have been
broadly applied to design health behaviour change interventions (Glanz, Rimer, &Viswanath, 2008 ), including the RAA theories (Fishbein, 2000; Hardeman et al.,
2002).
Despite the widespread use of HBTs contained in and beyond the RAA,
researchers are beginning to raise concerns about the trajectory of theory
development in the health behaviour field. In discussing the role of HBTs and
cumulative knowledge, Noar and Zimmerman ( 2005 ) argued that ‘[just] because we
are conducting more research on health behaviors does not necessarily mean that
we are adding substantive cumulative knowledge to this area of research’ (p. 275).
This is especially concerning for those who apply this knowledge to the practice ofhealth programme development; Crosby and Noar ( 2010) assert that ‘unfortunately,
theory development has not proceeded at a pace commensurate with the evolution of
health promotion practice’ (p. 259). Related to this, Rothman ( 2004) observes that
‘although theories may fluctuate in their popularity, their properties have remained
strikingly static over time’ (para. 4). He makes the critical point that theory should be
‘treated as a dynamic entity whose value depends on it being not only applied andtested rigorously, but also refined based on the findings afforded by those tests’
(para. 4). Indeed, a critical aspect of theory testing is that theories are proposed,
empirically tested and then modified based upon the findings of those empirical tests(Crosby, Kegler, & DiClemente, 2002 ). However, whether or not researchers are
actually modifying the theories is contestable. Simply because a theory is testable
does not necessarily mean that researchers are putting the said theory to the test. vanRyn and Heaney ( 1992 ) note that ‘the testable nature of theory gives it a practical
advantage over personal belief systems or common sense’ (p. 319). But this
advantage only holds if researchers are critically testing and concurrently modifyingtheory.
In an examination of this and other issues, Ogden ( 2003 ) conducted a systematic
review of theoretical tests of HBTs. She found that:
...the majority of studies reported results that were not consistent with the predicted
associations between constructs and left much of the variance in the outcome variableunexplained. However, rather than using the data to challenge the models , a range of
explanations were offered relating to the wording used, the population studied, the
behavior of concern, or the need for additional variables. All data are used to support
the models, but it is not clear what data would enable the models to be rejected . (p. 426,
emphasis added)
Thus, this review suggested that researchers are notusing their data to challenge
existing theory or to critically inform theory development.
In the current article, we explore in some detail one particular line of research /C1
the RAA /C1as a case study that may help advance an understanding of why HBTs
have been relatively static over time. In doing so, we raise and discuss several
significant issues or barriers that are essential to HBT development and modifica-tion, and we ultimately make recommendations for how to move forward in this
important area of inquiry.Health Psychology Review 35
Health Behaviour Theory and the Reasoned Action Approach
To ask and potentially answer questions about theory testing and development, we
must first define what a theory is. A broad definition of theory is given by Kerlinger
and Lee ( 1999): ‘a theory is a set of interrelated (concepts), definitions, and
propositions that present a systematic view of phenomena by specifying relations
among variables, with the purpose of explaining and predicting phenomena’ (p. 11).
Hochbaum, Sorenson, and Lorig ( 1992 ) define HBTs specifically as ‘tools to help
health educators better understand what influences health-relevant individual, group,
and institutional behaviors and to thereupon plan effective interventions directed at
health-beneficial results’ (p. 298). In addition, DiClemente, Crosby, and Kegler
(2009) suggest that HBTs should ‘provide a conceptual framework for selecting
key constructs hypothesized to influence health behavior and, as such, provide a
foundation for empirical investigations, intervention development, implementation,
and evaluation’ (p. 11). It is also important to note that there is a distinction between
two general types of HBTs: stage models and continuum models. Stage models, like
the TTM, identify processes of change and identifiable stages that individuals mayprogress through during the health behaviour change process. Alternatively,
continuum models consider a number of predictors and their relationship to one
another that ‘reflects the likelihood of action’; the RAA is of this type (Schwarzer,
2008, p. 3) (also see Weinstein, Rothman, & Sutton, 1998).
The RAA is an approach that extends beyond just the health arena, but as will be
demonstrated in the current article, it has been heavily applied in health and,
therefore, is one of the major HBTs (Glanz et al., 2008 ; Noar & Zimmerman, 2005 ).
Indeed, the RAA approach is best understood as a line of research with four
chronological phases (see Figure 1 for the RAA with shading to illustrate the
different theories that make up this approach). In the first phase, Fishbein and Ajzen
developed the TRA, a development that can be traced back to 1967 (Fishbein, 1967 ).
The TRA posits that in addition to a host of indirect influences (e.g., demographic
variables, norms and personality traits), attitudes towards the behaviour and
subjective norms concerning the behaviour are direct antecedents to behaviouralintention. Behavioural intention is then posited as most the direct antecedent to
behaviour (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975; Montan ˜o & Kasprzyk, 2008 ). Across a number
of behaviours, the TRA has been shown to have relatively strong predictive utility. In
a meta-analysis of 87 studies, Sheppard, Hartwick, and Warshaw ( 1988) found an
average correlation for the intention-behaviour relationship to be 0.53; the average
relationship between attitude/subjective norm-intention was 0.66. Despite its strong
performance, Ajzen believed the TRA was deficient in one significant way: it was
insufficient in explaining behaviours that were not under volitional control (Ajzen,
1991). Subsequently, Ajzen developed the TPB by including the concept of perceived
behavioural control in the model.
The addition of perceived behaviour control, which can be described as phase two
in the RAA line of research, required two considerations for how it fit into thepreviously established TRA. First, Ajzen and Madden ( 1986 ) note that in part, ‘the
effect of perceived behavioral control on behavior is completely mediated by
intention’ (p. 458). In addition, they posited that ‘perceived behavioral control can
help predict goal attainment independent of behavioral intention to the extent that it
reflects actual control with degree of accuracy’ (pp. 458 /C1459). The revised model,36 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
which included perceived behavioural control, was named the TPB. Ajzen ( 1991)
claims the TPB ‘provides a useful conceptual framework for dealing with thecomplexities of human social behavior’, especially for instances in which a personfeels they do not have complete volitional control over performing the behaviour(p. 206).
The third phase occurred in 1991 when a group of theorists (Albert Bandura,
Marshall Becker, Martin Fishbein, Frederick Kanfer, and Harry Triandis) convenedfor a workshop sponsored by the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH); thegroup was charged with developing a unified model of behaviour. The ultimate resultof the workshop was the development of the IBM, which derives its maincomponents from overlapping constructs in five health behaviour change theories,including TRA, TPB, SCT, HBM and the theory of interpersonal behaviour(Fishbein, 2000,2009; Fishbein et al., 1992 ; Montan ˜o & Kasprzyk, 2008 ). This
model and similar versions of this model have proven useful in understanding andpredicting both HIV prevention behaviours and cancer screening behaviours(Kasprzyk, Montan ˜o, & Fishbein, 1998; Montan ˜o, et al., 2004 ; Montan ˜o,
Figure 1. Reasoned action approach theories.
Note: Figure 1 uses colours to illustrate the development of theories within the RAA. Attitude ,
Norms ,Intention and Behaviour are shaded grey but are present in all four models. The
versions of each theory in this ﬁgure come from the best representations of the original theory,
as found in following sources: TRA (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980 ), TPB (Ajzen & Madden, 1986),
IBM (Montan ˜o & Kasprzyk, 2008), and RAA (Fishbein, 2008).Health Psychology Review 37
Thompson, Taylor, & Mahloch, 1997; von Haeften, Fishbein, Kasprzyk, &
Montano, 2001 ). Despite its promising utility, the IBM in its current form has not
yet been employed extensively by researchers. This may be the result of inadequateexposure for the model; the workshop occurred in 1991 and while an NIMH reportof the model appeared in 1992 (Fishbein et al., 1992 ), it wasn’t until 1998 that a
primary research article testing this model appeared in the mainstream researchliterature (Kasprzyk et al., 1998 ).
In the fourth phase of RAA, Fishbein and Ajzen began working together again.
They note in their last book (Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010 ) that their career paths had
diverged in the early 1980s, with Fishbein focusing on his work on HIV preventionusing the TRA and Ajzen devoting his time to developing the TPB. However, afterthe NIMH theorists’ workshop when Fishbein proposed the IBM, it did not gounnoticed that the IBM ‘was almost identical to Ajzen’s TPB ...[but] incorporated
Bandura’s ...notion of self-efficacy rather than Ajzen’s more recent concept of
perceived behavioral control’ (p. 19). This led both men to realise that ‘even thoughwe were at that time working quite independently, we were moving in similardirections’ and they began working together again in 2001 ‘when we began toreconcile the differences between our models’ (pp. 19 /C120). This reconciliation and the
broader programme of research that encompasses all of the theoretical variations ofthis approach has been labelled the RAA. In describing the approach, Fishbein(2008) states that ‘what the reasoned action approach attempts to do is to identify a
relatively small set of variables that can account for a substantial proportion of the
variance in any given behavior;’ these variables include ‘intentions, attitude, perceived
norms, self-efficacy or perceived behavioral control, behavioral beliefs (which areoften referred to as cost-benefits or outcome expectancies), normative beliefs, andcontrol beliefs’ (pp. 834 /C1835).
In sum, the RAA is essentially an approach that began with the TRA and is now
composed of a number of similar theories which posit that variables such as attitudes,norms and perceived behavioural control are important predictors of behavioralintention and, ultimately, behaviour. A critical examination of the entire RAA,however, reveals that the approach has changed little since this line of research firstbegan. First, the external variables or ‘background influence’ variables (see Figure 1 )
that are in many ways presented as ‘new’ in the IBM (Fishbein, 2009 ) were actually
included in the TRA more than 30 years ago (see Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980, Figure 7.1,
p. 84). This set of variables has thus long been hypothesised to affect behaviourindirectly through RAA variables (see Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980,p p .8 2 /C190). Second,
more fine-tuned understandings of some variables (e.g., norms /C1now represented as
injunctive and descriptive norms, and attitudes /C1now represented as experiential and
instrumental attitudes) have added value to the model, but these arguably do not
represent significant theoretical modifications. Third, the addition of self-efficacy tothe model, as indicated above, essentially parallels Ajzen and Madden’s addition ofperceived behavioural control to the TPB, which took place more than 25 years ago(Ajzen & Madden, 1986). It should be noted that other researchers had suggested
adding self-efficacy to the TRA more than a decade before Fishbein formally addedthe variable to the model in the form of the IBM (see de Vries, Dijkstra, & Kuhlman,1988). Also, as will be described below, several additional variables have been tested
and shown empirical value but have not been added to the model. Fourth, interesting(and potentially important) feedback loops from attitude to beliefs and behaviour to38 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
beliefs, evident in early TRA work (see Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975,p p .1 5 /C116, Figures
1.1, 1.2), have apparently been dropped from newer scholarship. In this manner, one
could argue that theories such as IBM are less complex and realistic than the earliest
work with the TRA and have changed little for the better across several decades.Finally, if we consider the fact that other ‘new’ IBM variables such as environmental
constraints and skills and abilities are listed as part of the IBM but only treated in a
very cursory manner (see Fishbein, 2000 ,2009 ), we are perhaps left wondering why
so little has changed over four decades of research (i.e., the IBM of today looks quite
similar to the original TRA of 1975). Scholars who conduct health behaviour change
research should critically consider if HBTs like those in the RAA have been
adequately tested and refined. If not, what is obstructing progress in theory
development and how can we overcome barriers in the future?
Important theory development considerations
Theoretical domain
If we are to first consider why HBTs such as the RAA have not advanced more fully
than they have, we must first address what we are trying to develop in the first place.
That is, what is the purview of an HBT? As an example, if the point is to develop a
theory that is focused only on beliefs and attitudes, then we should only considerthose types of variables as possible additions to the RAA. If the point is to develop a
more comprehensive theory of health behaviour, then we should consider a much
broader possible set of influences for the theory.
Advocates of the RAA approach, such as Montan ˜o and Kasprzyk ( 2008 ), state
that the ‘TRA was developed to better understand relationships between attitudes,
intentions and behaviors’ (p. 68). This suggests that the purview of the theory is
relegated to the social psychological realm of attitudes and beliefs. Ajzen ( 1991)
seems to take a broader view, stating that the TPB is ‘a theory designed to predict
and explain human behavior’ (p. 181). While clearly the earliest work with the TRA
was focused on attitudes and beliefs (Fishbein & Ajzen, 1975), Fishbein’s more recent
IBM does include some variables that go beyond that realm (e.g., environmental
constraints, skills and abilities). However, as indicated above, these variables seem to
be added in a more cursory fashion and the focus appears to be the extent to which
they constrain or advance the ability of attitudes and intention to affect behaviour
(Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010). The point here is that HBT researchers should engage in a
dialogue about what type of theory is most valuable to ‘build’. Without a roadmap
that directs the path, we are sure to get lost along the way.
In addition, the purview of an HBT has to do with whether its ultimate goal
is prediction, intervention or both. Writings on the RAA appear to suggest thatthis theoretical approach serves both purposes /C1behavioural prediction and
intervention /C1with perhaps prediction being the primary goal and intervention
being a secondary use (or application) of the theory (Fishbein, 2009). The
requirements for such a theory are likely to be different than one being developed
solely for prediction or intervention, and to date, the RAA may be more precise for
the former than the latter. For example, Hardeman et al. ( 2002 ) examined how the
TPB was applied in behaviour change interventions and unfortunately discovered
that scholars were not clear in how they used /C1and tested /C1the TPB. First, theyHealth Psychology Review 39
found that the targeted components of the TPB were poorly identified or not
identified at all, meaning it was difficult to assess how the TPB was actually used in
the intervention. Second, despite finding positive changes in behavioural intention
and behaviour in these studies, it was unclear how the TPB was used to design the
interventions and, therefore, the findings could not be attributed to the TPB’s role.
They argue ‘to allow judgment of the effectiveness of using the TPB to develop
interventions ...studies would need to apply the TPB more comprehensively and be
more explicit about how it has been applied’ (p. 148). They conclude that ‘at present
there thus is insufficient evidence to judge whether TPB components mediatechanges in intention and behavior within evaluated interventions’ (p. 149).
Related to this, a study conducted by Cooke and French ( 2008 ) examined the
TRA and the TPB to predict intentions and attendance at screening programmes.
They claim ‘the TRA/TPB was an effective framework for predicting screening
intentions and attendance. The next step is to perform experimental research that
builds on these findings to improve screening attendance’ (p. 763). Several scholars
have recently advocated such an approach (Noar & Mehrotra, 2011 ; Sniehotta, 2009;
Weinstein, 2007), as there is no guarantee that factors found to be associated with
intentions and behaviours can be applied in interventions as causal factors that willresult in behavioural changes. To date, however, the field has almost entirely operated
under a survey research paradigm, using (mostly cross-sectional) survey research
studies to test HBTs and then applying those HBTs as bases for health behaviour
interventions. This reasoning essentially involves a leap of faith that those factors
found to be associated with behaviours in tests of HBTs will act as causal
mechanisms in the context of interventions. While the paradigm in this area may
begin to shift towards more experimental research, currently most theory testing is
conducted using survey research. Thus, the status quo is such that we have much
more evidence that HBTs contain factors that are associated with and may predict
behaviour and much less evidence that changes in those factors in the context of
interventions will lead to health behaviour changes. While there is some support for
the notion that theory-based interventions are more efficacious than those that lack
a theoretical basis (Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ), the difficulties in separating out the
contribution of theory to intervention efficacy, including the lack of mediation
analyses in many published interventions, has left open questions about the precise
role of theory in intervention efficacy (Noar & Mehrotra, 2011).
Tension between generalisability and utility
A key aspect of theory is that it is generalisable, or it is ‘robust and therefore may be
applicable across diverse venues, populations, and social environments’ (DiClemente,
Crosby, & Kegler, 2002, p. 3). Thus, if a theory performs similarly well across diverse
behavioural areas, then this contributes to evidence of its generalisability. Another
aspect of theory is that it must have utility, or the degree to which the theory is ‘useful
and helpful’ in the field (Prochaska, Wright, & Velicer, 2008, p. 577). In many ways,
these two dimensions could at times be in conflict with one another, particularly in
the HBT area. As health behaviour change researchers, we should ask ourselves /C1is it
better to have a broad theory that predicts across behaviours but is not very precise
(in other words, one that is generalisable), or a more specific theory that predicts40 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
more precisely (and has utility to practitioners/researchers) but has differences across
behaviours or with regard to other factors?
When we examine the data in the HBT area, it is fairly clear that the relationship
between theoretical constructs in the RAA varies depends on the behaviour studied.
For example, Godin and Kok ( 1996) reviewed 56 health behaviour studies reporting
87 applications of the TPB and found that the average correlations betweentheoretical constructs in the TPB varied according to the health behaviour category.The average correlation between attitude and intention for addictive behaviours wasr/C300.53, while the average correlation between attitude and intention for healthy
eating was r/C300.34. Moreover, behaviour-specific reviews of TRA/TPB have often
thoughtfully suggested adding variables to the theories that are specific to aparticular domain (e.g., Sheeran, Abraham, & Orbell, 1999), but to our knowledge
no formalised behaviour-specific TRA or TPB exists. The literature does suggest,
however, that researchers should strongly consider having behaviour-specific versionsof theories like the TPB in order to (1) better understand particular behaviours and(2) provide more relevant theoretical guidance for designing interventions for specificbehaviours.
Moreover, it is apparent in practice that many researchers are already using the
behaviour-specific (or utility) approach. Painter et al.’s ( 2008) examination of the use
of HBTs found that researchers use theory along a continuum, from studies being
merely informed by theory to the opposite end where theory is being built and
created. Applying an entire theory for theory testing or intervention was found torarely be the case. One category, testing theory, was used by only 7.2% of the studiesexamined and even then, a study only had to measure and explicitly test halfof the
theoretical constructs for the theory used. They concluded that to advance the use oftheory in health behaviour research, ‘theory should be used more thoroughly ...this
can be done by measuring and testing the full set of key constructs in a theory’ (p.362). Despite this call, it is more common for researchers to pick and choose
theoretical and other constructs based upon what support is found in the empirical
literature concerning the particular behaviour under study, rather than attempting tomeasure and test the entire theory (Glanz & Bishop, 2010).
Hochbaum et al. ( 1992 ) provide a good explanation for this phenomenon. They
state that:
although academics may wish to test whether (or demonstrate that) some given theories
contribute to a project’s success and look for opportunities to do so, practitioners search
for ways to assure success ....[and] they must search for and utilise anything and
everything that will help them plan and conduct programs to assure success. (pp. 303,
emphasis added)
In sum, the tension between generalisability and utility can in some ways be
understood as a tension between academics, who desire theoretical fidelity inresearch, and practitioners, who desire theories that can guide programme
development for specific contexts.
Criteria for adding
/removing variables
One of the most visible ways a theory can develop is through the addition or removal
of variables that can help better explain and predict behaviour. This is also one of theHealth Psychology Review 41
most important ways that HBT develops because ‘improvements in both HBT and
intervention methods depend on each other’ (Rothman, 2004 , p. 2). Glanz et al.
(2008) argue ‘the best theory is informed by practice; the best practice should be
grounded in theory’ (p. 24). However, there is little agreement and even less guidancefor how theorists and/or researchers should go about adding and removing variables.In other words, it is unclear how researchers should use data from tests of theory in
the field to inform theory development and add or remove variables. Indeed, the
existing evidence suggests that when researchers observe null findings for particularvariables in their theory-testing studies, they often ‘explain away’ this phenomenon
by pointing to measurement problems or other issues rather than possible problems
with the theory itself (Ogden, 2003 ). While we cannot prove the null hypothesis, and
thus there may indeed be methodological issues that play into this problem, we stillneed criteria that can help guide what decisions to make about adding and removing
variables from a theory. This may not be as important in the context of a single study,
but it is critical when, over time (e.g., meta-analytic review), it becomes evident thatevidence is gathering that a particular variable should be added or removed from atheory.
Dubin ( 1978) posits that an ‘unconstrained willingness to admit all possible units
into a scientific model provides the widest range of opportunities for theory building’
(p. 58). He outlines numerous ways in which theorists may add (or invent) variables(or units) for a theory. These include invention by extension of an existing unit,
invention by subdivision of an existing variable, invention through disproving the
null hypothesis (i.e. a relationship or significant difference does exist), inventionthrough factor analysis, invention through scale analysis and invention of anintervening variable. Despite these many suggestions, Dubin is unclear about the
specific standards for adding a new variable. For instance, many argue that a new
variable must explain variance in the outcome variable. Ajzen ( 1991), when
discussing additions to the TPB, says, ‘the theory of planned behavior is, inprinciple, open to the inclusion of additional predictors if it can be shown that they
capture a significant proportion of the variance in intention or behavior after the
theory’s current variables have been taken into account’ (p. 199). Furthermore,Dubin discusses the removal of variables from a theory. He states that ‘when it ispossible to postulate nointeraction between units, we may exclude one or both from
a model’ (p. 86). In other words, if a predictor variable does not explain variance in
an outcome variable, or it is not meaningfully related to other model variables in amediating or moderating role, it should be considered for removal from the theory.
The RAA has undergone some changes in this category since the original TRA
was developed. First, one can see that a few new variables have been added. For
example, as previously mentioned, the added construct of perceived behaviouralcontrol has been shown to be a significant predictor of behaviour, especially inbehaviours not completely under volitional control (Ajzen, 1991). Second, some
variables have been divided into more precise constructs; for example, norms in the
IBM is conceptualised as both injunctive norms and descriptive norms, rather thansolely injunctive norms (originally called subjective norms in the TRA; Fishbein &
Ajzen, 1975). These changes appear to have been made based upon empirical
evidence demonstrating the contribution of these variables to the theory, and thatprogress is to be commended.42 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
However, as indicated earlier in this paper, the RAA has made what we would
describe as only minor changes after more than four decades of research. In addition,there are likely to be several important variables that could be strong candidates toadd to the RAA approach, given that there is room for improvement in the theory. Infact, research has demonstrated a host of variables that meet Ajzen’s criteria listedabove, and yet these variables have not been formally added to the theory. WhileRAA theories have fairly good prediction/association for a theory that attempts to
predict behaviour, meta-analyses also suggest that much of the variance is left
unexplained (Conner & Armitage, 1998; Sandberg & Conner, 2008). For example,
Armitage and Connor ( 2001) conducted a meta-analysis ( k/C30185) of studies testing
the TPB and found that the average multiple correlation of attitude, subjective normand perceived behavioural control with behavioural intention was R/C300.63,
explaining 39% of the variance ( R
2/C300.39). Additionally, the average multiple
correlation of behavioural intention and perceived behavioural control withbehaviour was R/C300.52, explaining 27% of the variance ( R
2/C300.27). While these
data represent fairly good prediction in the context of these studies, we need torecognise that there are several limitations of such theoretical tests. These includeerrors and bias in self-report data (e.g., social desirability), the overreliance on cross-sectional data which may exaggerate a theory’s true effects (Weinstein, 2007 ), the lack
of controlling for past behaviour in analyses and the limitations of predictingintention as it relates to the intention /C1behaviour gap (Sheeran, 2002 ). Thus, these
theories may not actually be performing as well as the data suggest that they do, andwe should continually seek to improve the prediction of our theories where possible.
To further inform this discussion, Table 1 presents data from several meta-
analyses of the TPB, which have considered the influence of additional variables thatarenotformally a part of the theory. While each meta-analysis tends to confirm the
association of the formal TPB variables with behavioural intention (and in one case,with behaviour), these meta-analyses reveal that other variables /C1such as anticipated
regret, moral norms and self-identity /C1exhibit associations with intention that are
equal to or greater than the traditional TPB variables. Moreover, each meta-analysisdemonstrates that the novel variables add unique variance in the prediction ofintention over and above the traditional TPB predictor variables, and thus they donot appear to be redundant with current TPB variables. Thus, these variables appearto meet Ajzen’s criteria for adding variables to the TPB. While the first meta-analysislends support for a change that was made to the IBM (adding descriptive norms tothe theory), none of the other novel variables in these meta-analyses have beenformally added to any RAA theories. Nor have other mediating or moderatingvariables been added to the theory, despite compelling research on such factors (e.g.,Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006 ; Sheppard et al., 1988). In fact, one of the most
compelling areas for extension of the RAA is with regard to the intention /C1behaviour
gap, which refers to the phenomenon that many intenders do notengage in the
intended behaviour, in contrast to the clear prediction from RAA theories (Sheeran,2002). Recent meta-analytic (experimental) research demonstrates that a large
increase in intentions produces only a small increase in behaviour, further illustratingthis point (Webb & Sheeran, 2006). While much research suggests a variety of
variables that may help us better understand and ‘close’ this gap /C1such as
implementation intentions (Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 2006; Orbell, Hodgkins, &
Sheeran, 1997), preparatory behaviours (Abraham et al., 1999; Bryan, Fisher, &Health Psychology Review 43
Table 1. Some examples of meta-analyses that have empirically demonstrated the value of
additional variables in the context of the theory of planned behaviour.
Study Variable r-Ir-PB r-FB Additional findings
Rivis and Sheeran ( 2003)/C1
18 studies conductedacross various behavioursDescriptive
norm0.46 /C1/C1 Descriptive norm was
significantly ( pB0.001)
associated with intentionwhen controlling for all TPB
predictor variables.
Attitude 0.58 /C1/C1
Subjective
norm0.44 /C1/C1
Perceived
behavioural
control0.21 /C1/C1
Sandberg and Conner
(2008 )/C120 studies
conducted across various
behavioursAnticipated
regret0.47 0.34 0.28 Anticipated regret was
significantly ( pB0.001)
associated with intention
and future behaviour when
controlling for all TPBpredictor variables. When
past behaviour was added to
the models, anticipatedregret remained significant
(pB0.001) in the intention
model but was reduced tonon-significance in the
future behaviour model.
Attitude 0.44 0.30 0.27Subjectivenorm0.43 0.18 0.21
Perceived
behaviouralcontrol0.30 0.31 0.11
Rise, Sheeran, and
Hukkelberg ( 2010 )/C133
studies conducted across
various behavioursSelf-identity 0.47 /C1/C1 Self-identity was
significantly ( pB0.001)
associated with intention
when controlling for all TPB
predictor variables; whenpast behaviour was added tothe model, it remained
significant ( pB0.001).
Attitude 0.50 /C1/C1
Subjective
norm0.39 /C1/C1
Perceived
behavioral
control0.35 /C1/C144 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
Fisher, 2002 ) and strategic or action planning (Schwarzer, 2008 ; Sniehotta, Scholz, &
Schwarzer, 2005 )/C1RAA theories have done virtually nothing to integrate such work
into its approach. Moreover, the notion of intention itself has been challenged and
questioned, with studies showing that in at least some cases, constructs such asbehavioural willingness (Gibbons, Gerrard, Blanton, & Russell, 1998) or suscept-
ibility (Pierce et al., 1996) may be more appropriate to understanding individuals
who may engage in the behaviour. To date, the RAA approach has notintegrated any
of this work.
It is important to note that Fishbein and Ajzen ( 2010) have at least considered
some of these variables as possible additions to their approach. One key reason given
for not adding such variables is that some of these variables are seen as only applyingto particular behaviours and not more broadly across numerous classes of behaviour
(Fishbein & Ajzen, 2010, pp. 282 /C1284). Thus, whereas generality appears to be
preferred by the developers of the RAA, practitioners/interventionists are more likelyto prefer specificity and better prediction of a particular behaviour.
Power to change a theory
Rothman ( 2004) states that ‘the development and specification of theories of human
behavior depend upon an iterative series of research activities in which theoretical
principles initially formulated by basic behavioral scientists are tested and evaluatedTable 1 ( Continued )
Study Variable r-Ir-PB r-FB Additional findings
Rivis, Sheeran, and
Armitage ( 2009 )/C127
studies conducted acrossvarious behavioursMoral norms 0.47 /C1/C1 Moral norms was
significantly ( pB0.001)
associated with intentionwhen controlling for all TPBpredictor variables; when
anticipated affect was added
to the model, it remainedsignificant ( pB0.001).
Anticipated
affect0.42 /C1/C1 Anticipated affect was
significantly ( pB0.001)
associated with intention
when controlling for all TPB
predictor variables; whenmoral norms was added to
the model, it remained
significant ( pB0.001).
Attitude /C1/C1/C1
Subjective
norm/C1/C1/C1
Perceived
behavioural
control/C1/C1/C1
Note: All r’s are weighed correlations from meta-analysis; r-I/C30correlation with intention; r-PB/C30
correlation with past behaviour; r-FB/C30correlation with future behaviour.Health Psychology Review 45
by applied behavior scientists’ (p. 3). He goes on to say, ‘these tests provide critical
information that enables basic scientists to revise, refine, or reject their initialprinciples’ (p. 3). Despite evidence that changes should be made to the RAA, few
changes have been made over the years. In addition to the three previous sections
discussing this issue, one final question remains /C1who has the authority to change a
theory? Only the original theorist of that particular theory? Any researcher in thefield? This is an important issue that has been given only scant attention in theliterature.
One approach would dictate that any researcher who finds evidence of a needed
change and publishes that information in an academic journal has suggested a
change in the theory. However, the published literature is full of studies in whichempirical evidence suggests changes that could or should be made to the RAA, and
these changes are often not embraced by the theorists themselves (Fishbein & Ajzen,
2010) or other researchers in the field. If we look at the history of RAA theories, we
see that the TRA and TPB were developed primarily by two researchers whopresented these theories at conferences and published work in academic journals andbooks. However, with the massive amount of health-related research and so manyresearchers undertaking such work, an important conference presentation or journalpublication might get lost in the milieu. Indeed, simply keeping up with the largeamount of research in particular theoretical domains can be difficult given how much
research is published, particularly in the health behaviour field. Also, the theorists
themselves may not be as open to adding new variables to their theory as comparedto particular research communities. Indeed, we have already made the case thatagendas differ /C1while the theorists wish to understand the smallest set of variables
that predict the largest numbers of behaviours, applied researchers are moreinterested in the most precise understanding of a particular behaviour. These theory
development goals are quite different from one another.
Instead, organisations that sponsor work in theory development in specific
behavioural domains and provide avenues for dissemination of new or modified
theories may be a better way to organise theoretical developments. In fact, it is worthpointing out that the catalyst for the development of the IBM was a theorist’sworkshop organised by the NIMH that brought several scholars together with thegoal of developing a unified theory of behavioural prediction focused on HIV/AIDS-related behaviours. If this effort had not occurred, the RAA approach may haveevolved even less than it has to date. Also, if this effort had been followed up with anorganisational focus on HIV/AIDS-related theories and models that were supported
by the latest research, more developments might have come from that workshop
effort than solely the IBM. Such products could have been disseminated to relevantresearchers, using several mechanisms at the disposal of organisations such as theNational Institutes of Health (e.g., special journal issue, website, FundingOpportunity Announcement, etc.).
Recommendations for theory development in the RAA
The previous section proposed four important barriers to consider in theory
development, modification and dissemination. While these were presented withinthe context of a case study of the RAA, they can and should be considered withregard to the development of other HBTs. With that in mind, suggestions on the use46 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
and modification of RAA theories and other HBTS are discussed below and
summarised in Table 2 .
First, the theoretical domain for theories such as RAA should be clarified.
Theories like the TRA, TPB and IBM were initially developed as socialpsychological theories, but it remains unclear as to what theoretical territory they
seek to cover now and in the future. Are the theories open to variables that reside
outside the social psychological domain, or are they instead relegated solely to thatdomain? This issue is also related to the second issue of intervention development, as
to date, virtually all of the RAA variables are social psychological and thus amenable
to change in psychologically oriented interventions. An exception to this was theaddition of environmental constraints to the IBM, which has the potential to move
the theory beyond the social psychological domain. To date, the addition of that
variable appears to be largely cursory in nature; it may also be related to calls toseparate actual control (i.e., environmental constraints) from perceived behavioural
control in the TPB (Godin & Kok, 1996 ).
We have noted throughout this paper that HBTs are continually used as bases for
health behaviour interventions. However, we have also noted that the bulk ofresearch on these theories is correlational, and the primary function of HBTs has
been to explain and predict behaviours. Thus, we should be careful when using
theories in designing interventions, as the extent to which the predictor variablesrepresent causal mechanisms in behaviour change is not known. In addition to
clarifying how theoretical variables are translated within particular interventions
(Hardeman et al., 2002), we also need increased experimental research, using the
Table 2. Recommendations for advancing health behaviour theory development and
modiﬁcation.
Issue Recommendations
Theoretical domain Clarify theoretical territory of RAA theories; advance
discussion of prediction vs. intervention applications ofRAA theories; conduct new experimental research on
RAA theories
Generalisability vs. utility Recognise differing agendas of basic versus applied
researchers; consider two lines of advancement for RAA
theories /C1a general theory that applies to the most
behaviours and behaviour-specific theories in key healthareas such as diet, exercise, safer sex, etc.
Criteria for changing theory Advance conversation on criteria for adding/amending/
removing variables from theory; make formal changes to
general and behaviour-specific RAA theories based onthe research literature (in particular using data generated
from meta-analysis)
Organisational tracking of
theoretical developmentsDiscuss new ways to track theoretical developments in
HBT; consider a consensus approach that takes theory
modification decisions out of the hands of the few; move
forward with either an expert panel approach or a wiki-platform approach to theoretical tracking and
modificationHealth Psychology Review 47
RAA approach (Noar & Mehrotra, 2011 ; Weinstein, 2007 ). Indeed, it is somewhat
remarkable that it took more than two decades from the development of the theoryfor the first experimental test of the TPB to be conducted, published quite recently(Sniehotta, 2009). Rather than conducting a test of the theory, using the typical
survey research approach, this study conducted a factorial experiment to examine theimpact of interventions based on particular TPB factors (e.g., behavioural beliefs andnormative beliefs). While results indicated some support of the theory in terms of
changing some TPB factors and intentions, results with regard to behaviour change
were inconsistent with TPB predictions. While increased experimental research hasthe potential to greatly advance our understanding of HBT and behaviour changemechanisms, to date it has only seldom been applied in testing HBTs (Noar &Mehrotra, 2011; Sniehotta, 2009 ). More experimental research with HBTs is greatly
needed.
Second, when there is tension between generalisability and utility, utility should
be given preference, given the applied nature of the health field. We have alreadydemonstrated that applied researchers are apparently giving preference to utility overgeneralisability (Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ; Painter, et al., 2008 ). Additionally, and
perhaps more importantly, by giving preference to utility we create a researchenvironment in which we are following conceptual thinking but also empirical datato where they lead. Moreover, the health field is largely divided into areas whereresearchers study different diseases and behaviours, and to the extent that differentbehaviours can be best predicted by variations on particular theories, we should work
to understand this and formalise such theories. However, given that Fishbein and
Ajzen’s ( 2010) stated goal is to have a general theory that applies broadly across
behaviours, such a general theory will likely always exist. Further, in the HBTdomain, understanding what factors are common to behaviour and behaviourchange across theories is certainly of interest, especially in the context of multiplebehaviour change interventions (Noar, Chabot, & Zimmerman, 2008 ). However, in
an applied context, it is clear that behaviour-specific versions of theories such as TPBwill be most precise in terms of behavioural prediction, and they are also most likelyto be instructive for intervention development. As one example of this, research inthe realm of safer sex has suggested a whole set of factors that could fruitfully informa safer sex TRA/TPB, from partner norms to condom communication topreparatory behaviours (Abraham et al., 1999; Bryan et al., 2002 ; Sheeran et al.,
1999). Despite this, no behaviour-specific TRA/TPB formally exists, even though
such a development would likely better build the cumulative theoretical knowledge inthe safer sex and other arenas.
Third, and related to utility, we must be open to changing our theories when
particular elements within those theories do not work when empirically tested in the
real world. More specifically, if variables are not performing in a particular area, thenthey should be seriously considered for removal (or amendment) from the theory inthat particular domain; similarly, variables demonstrating important (theoretical andempirical) contributions should be seriously considered for addition to a giventheory. Importantly, this draws attention to the fact that there can be vastly differentcharacteristics for different health behaviours. In fact, previous research has shownthat for individual behaviours, the RAA may work in different ways and additionalvariables may be needed to explain and predict particular behaviours, while othervariables may need to be removed or amended with regard to other behaviours (Blue,48 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
1995; Godin & Kok, 1996). This is entirely consistent with a behaviour-specific
approach.
Fourth, the process for tracking and disseminating findings on theory develop-
ment can be greatly improved. In an age, where a plethora of information exists and alarge number of researchers and practitioners use theory, it is easy for potentialdevelopments to get ‘lost in the shuffle.’ Organisations with a stake in particularhealth areas may be best suited for tracking the literature on particular behaviour-specific theories and, over time, making refinements to the theories. Organizationssuch as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National CancerInstitute have major stakes in the accuracy and completeness of HBTs in particularhealth domains, and they also have considerable influence and disseminationcapabilities. Such organisations would thus be well suited to the task of trackingtheoretical developments in high-priority behavioural domains, and putting out theirown versions and suggested modifications of HBTs in the form of publications, on
websites, and in relation to funding announcements. Moreover, the advantages of
putting a theory online are such that a ‘living’ version of the theory could be postedand modified over time as additional empirical evidence is generated and evaluatedby an expert group charged with this task.
However, to ensure that changes to the theory are made thoughtfully, an advisory
committee could consult on how empirical data would be used to modify the theoryand would recommend theoretical changes at specified intervals, based on theempirical evidence in the literature. Alternatively, this process could use a ‘wiki’model where the broad community of researchers has direct control over modifica-tions to the theory online, and changes are made by anyone within the researchcommunity. Under this model, which has been very successful in the case of websitessuch as Wikipedia, changes made that are inaccurate or not agreed upon by most ofthe community are amended by a member of that community. Such a project couldbe hosted by the National Cancer Institute’s grid-enabled measures website, whichalready uses a wiki-based platform for health behaviour (and other) constructs,definitions, measures, datasets and other items (see http://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/
brp/gem.html ).
Conclusion
The purpose of this paper was to explore the issues related to barriers to theoretical
development in HBTs. Using the RAA as a case study, we explored, in-depth, fourimportant considerations for theory development and testing and then providedrecommendations for stimulating progress in these areas. If those of us who researchhealth behaviour and test and apply these theories begin to demand more of our
theories, the result will ultimately be more advanced and precise theories than those
that exist today. We will not be guilty of continuing the trend of a large theory-testingliterature that seems to have relatively little impact on the actual make-up of ourcurrent HBTs (Crosby & Noar, 2010; Rothman, 2004 ). Instead, we can develop
theories that are informed by data and are more effective at explaining andpredicting health behaviours as well as improving the ability of our interventions tochange health behaviour.Health Psychology Review 49
References
Abraham, C., Sheeran, P ., Norman, P ., Conner, M., de Vries, N., & Otten, W . (1999). When
good intentions are not enough: Modeling postdecisional cognitive correlates of condomuse.Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,29(12), 2591 /C12612. doi: 10.1111/j.1559-1816.1999.
tb00127.x
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior & Human Decision
Processes ,50(2), 179 /C1211. doi: 10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behavior .
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Ajzen, I., & Madden, T. J. (1986). Prediction of goal-directed behavior: Attitudes, intentions,
and perceived behavioral control. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology ,22(5),
453/C1474. doi: 10.1016/0022-1031(86)90045-4
Albarracı ´n, D., Johnson, B. T., Fishbein, M., & Muellerleile, P . A. (2001). Theories of
reasoned action and planned behavior as models of condom use: A meta-analysis.Psychological Bulletin ,127, 142/C1161. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.127.1.142
Armitage, C. J., & Conner, M. (2001). Efﬁcacy of the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-
analytic review. British Journal of Social Psychology ,40(4), 471 /C1499. doi: 10.1348/0144
66601164939
Blue, C. L. (1995). The predictive capacity of the theory of reasoned action and the theory of
planned behavior in exercise research: An integrated literature review. Research in Nursing &
Health ,18, 105/C1121. doi: 10.1002/nur.4770180205
Bryan, A., Fisher, J. D., & Fisher, W . A. (2002). Tests of the mediational role of preparatory
safer sexual behavior in the context of the theory of planned behavior. Health Psychology ,
21(1), 71/C180. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.21.1.71
Conner, M., & Armitage, C. J. (1998). Extending the theory of planned behavior: A review
and avenues for further research. Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,28, 1429/C11464.
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.1998.tb01685.x
Cooke, R., & French, D. P . (2008). How well do the theory of reasoned action and theory of
planned behaviour predict intentions and attendance at screening programmes? A meta-analysis. Psychology & Health ,23, 745/C1765. doi: 10.1080/08870440701544437
Crosby, R. A., Kegler, M. C., & DiClemente, R. J. (2002). Understanding and applying theory
in health promotion practice and research. In R. J. DiClemente, R. A. Crosby, & M. C.Kegler (Eds.), Emerging theories in health promotion practice and research: Strategies for
improving public health (1st ed, pp. 1 /C115). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Crosby, R., & Noar, S. M. (2010). Theory development in health promotion: Are we there yet?
Journal of Behavioral Medicine ,33
, 259/C1263. doi: 10.1007/s10865-010-9260-1
de Vries, H., Dijkstra, M., & Kuhlman, P . (1988). Self-efﬁcacy: The third factor besides
attitude and subjective norm as a predictor of behavioural intentions. Health Education
Research ,3(3), 273 /C1282. doi: 10.1093/her/3.3.273
DiClemente, R. J., Crosby, R. A., & Kegler, M. C. (2002). Emerging theories in health
promotion practice and research . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
DiClemente, R. J., Crosby, R. A., & Kegler, M. C. (2009). Emerging theories in health
promotion practice and research (2nd ed). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Dubin, R. (1978). Theory building . New York, NY: The Free Press.
Fishbein, M. (1967). Attitude and the prediction of behavior. In M. Fishbein (Ed.), Readings
in attitude theory and measurement pp. 4477 /C14492). New York, NY: John Wiley.
Fishbein, M. (2000). The role of theory in HIV prevention. AIDS Care ,12(3), 273 /C1278.
doi:10.1080/09540120050042918
Fishbein, M. (2008). A reasoned action approach to health promotion. Medical Decision
Making ,28, 834/C1844. doi: 10.1177/0272989x08326092
Fishbein, M. (2009). An integrative model for behavioral prediction and its application to
health promotion. In R. J. DiClemente, R. A. Crosby, & M. C. Kegler (Eds.), Emerging
theories in health promotion practice and research (2nd ed., pp. 215 /C1234). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (1975). Belief, attitude, intention, and behavior: An introduction to
theory and research . Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.50 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
Fishbein, M., & Ajzen, I. (2010). Predicting and changing behavior: The reasoned action
approach . New Y ork, NY: Psychology Press.
Fishbein, M., Bandura, A., Triandis, H. C., Kanfer, F. H., Becker, M. H., & Middlestadt, S. E.
(1992). Factors inﬂuencing behavior and behavior change. Final report, theorists workshop.
Bethesda, MD: National Institute of Mental Health.
Gibbons, F. X., Gerrard, M., Blanton, H., & Russell, D. W . (1998). Reasoned action and social
reaction: Willingness and intention as independent predictors of health risk. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology ,74(5), 1164 /C11180. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.74.5.1164
Glanz, K., & Bishop, D. B. (2010). The role of behavioral science theory in development
and implementation of public health interventions. Annual Review of Public Health ,31(1),
399/C1418. doi: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103604
Glanz, K., Rimer, B. K., & Viswanath, K. (2008). Theory, research, and practice in health
behavior and health education. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath (Eds.), Health
behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice (4th ed., pp. 23 /C140). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Godin, G., & Kok, G. (1996). The theory of planned behavior: A review of its applications to
health-related behaviors. American Journal of Health Promotion ,11(2), 87/C198. doi: 10.4278/
0890-1171-11.2.87
Gollwitzer, P . M., & Sheeran, P . (2006). Implementation intentions and goal achievement: A
meta-analysis of effects and processes. In M. P . Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social
psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 69 /C1119). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press.
Hardeman, W ., Johnston, M., Johnston, D. W ., Bonetti, D., Wareham, N. J., & Kinmonth, A.
L. (2002). Application of the theory of planned behaviour in behaviour change interven-tions: A systematic review. Psychology & Health ,17, 123/C1158. doi: 10.1080/088704402900
13644
Hochbaum, G. M., Sorenson, J. R., & Lorig, K. (1992). Theory in health education practice.
Health Education & Behavior ,19, 295/C1313. doi: 10.1177/109019819201900303
Kasprzyk, D., Montan ˜o, D. E., & Fishbein, M. (1998). Application of an integrated behavioral
model to predict condom use: A prospective study among high HIV risk groups. Journal
of Applied Social Psychology ,28, 1557/C11583. doi: 10.1111/j.1559-1816.1998.tb01690.x
Kerlinger, F. N., & Lee, H. B. (1999). Foundations of behavioral research . Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth.
Montan ˜o, D. E., & Kasprzyk, D. (2008). Theory of reasoned action, theory of planned
behavior, and the integrated behavioral model. In K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, & K. Viswanath
(Eds.), Health behavior and health education: Theory, research, and practice (4th ed.,
pp. 67/C196). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Montan ˜o, D. E., Selby, J. V ., Somkin, C. P ., Bhat, A., & Nadel, M. (2004). Acceptance of
ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy screening for colorectal cancer. Cancer Detection and Prevention ,
28(1), 43/C151. doi: 10.1016/j.cdp.2003.11.005
Montan ˜o, D. E., Thompson, B., Taylor, V . M., & Mahloch, J. (1997). Understanding
mammography intention and utilization among women in an inner city public hospital
clinic. Preventive Medicine ,26, 817/C1824. doi: 10.1006/pmed.1997.0215
Noar, S. M., Chabot, M., & Zimmerman, R. S. (2008). Applying health behavior theory
to multiple behavior change: Considerations and approaches. Preventive Medicine ,46(3),
275/C1280. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2007.08.001
Noar, S. M., & Mehrotra, P . (2011). Toward a new methodological paradigm for testing
theories of health behavior and health behavior change. Patient Education and Counseling ,
82, 468/C1474. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2010.11.016 .
Noar, S. M., & Zimmerman, R. S. (2005). Health behavior theory and cumulative knowledge
regarding health behaviors: Are we moving in the right direction? Health Education
Research ,20, 275/C1290. doi: 10.1093/her/cyg113
Ogden, J. (2003). Some problems with social cognition models: A pragmatic and conceptual
analysis. Health Psychology ,22(4), 424 /C1428. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.22.4.424
Orbell, S., Hodgkins, S., & Sheeran, P . (1997). Implementation intentions and the theory of
planned behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin ,23(9), 945 /C1954. doi: 10.1177/
0146167297239004Health Psychology Review 51
Painter, J. E., Borba, C. P . C., Hynes, M., Mays, D., & Glanz, K. (2008). The use of theory in
health behavior research from 2000 to 2005: A systematic review. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine ,35, 358/C1362. doi: 10.1007/s12160-008-9042-y
Pierce, J. P ., Choi, W . S., Gilpin, E. A., Farkas, A. J., & Merritt, R. K. (1996). Validation of
susceptibility as a predictor of which adolescents take up smoking in the United States.
Health Psychology ,15(5), 355 /C1361. doi: 10.1037/0278-6133.15.5.355
Prochaska, J. O., Wright, J. A., & Velicer, W . F. (2008). Evaluating theories of health behavior
change: A hierarchy of criteria applied to the transtheoretical model. Applied Psychology:
An International Review ,57, 561/C1588. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2008.00345.x
Rise, J., Sheeran, P ., & Hukkelberg, S. (2010). The role of self-identity in the theory of planned
behavior: A meta-analysis. Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,40, 1085 /C11105.
doi:10.1111/j.1559-1816.2010.00611.x
Rivis, A., & Sheeran, P . (2003). Descriptive norms as an additional predictor in the theory of
planned behaviour: A meta-analysis. Current Psychology ,22(3), 218 /C1233. doi: 10.1007/
s12144-003-1018-2
Rivis, A., Sheeran, P ., & Armitage, C. J. (2009). Expanding the affective and normative
components of the theory of planned behavior: A meta-analysis of anticipated affect and
moral norms. Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,39(12), 2985 /C13019. doi: 10.1111/j.1559-
1816.2009.00558.x
Rothman, A. (2004). ‘‘Is there nothing more practical than a good theory?’’: Why innovations
and advances in health behavior change will arise if interventions are used to test and reﬁne
theory. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,1(1), 1/C17.
doi:10.1186/1479-5868-1-11
Sandberg, T., & Conner, M. (2008). Anticipated regret as an additional predictor in the theory
of planned behaviour: A meta-analysis. British Journal of Social Psychology ,47, 589/C1606.
doi:10.1348/014466607x258704
Schwarzer, R. (2008). Modeling health behavior change: How to predict and modify the
adoption and maintenance of health behaviors. Applied Psychology: An International
Review ,57(1), 1/C129. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-0597.2007.00325.x
Sheeran, P . (2002). Intention *behavior relations: A conceptual and empirical review.
European Review of Social Psychology ,12(1), 1/C136. doi: 10.1080/14792772143000003
Sheeran, P ., Abraham, C., & Orbell, S. (1999). Psychosocial correlates of heterosexual condom
use: A meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin ,125(1), 90/C1132. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.125.1.
90
Sheppard, B. H., Hartwick, J., & Warshaw, P . R. (1988). The theory of reasoned action: A
meta-analysis of past research with recommendations for modiﬁcations and future research.
Journal of Consumer Research ,15(3), 325 /C1343. doi: 10.1086/209170
Sniehotta, F. (2009). An experimental test of the theory of planned behavior. Applied
Psychology: Health & Well-Being ,1(2), 257 /C1270. doi: 10.1111/j.1758-0854.2009.01013.x
Sniehotta, F. F., Scholz, U., & Schwarzer, R. (2005). Bridging the intention /C1behaviour gap:
Planning, self-efﬁcacy, and action control in the adoption and maintenance of physicalexercise. Psychology & Health ,20(2), 143 /C1160. doi: 10.1080/08870440512331317670
van Ryn, M., & Heaney, C. A. (1992). What’s the use of theory? Health Education Quarterly ,
19, 315/C1330. doi: 10.1177/109019819201900304
von Haeften, I., Fishbein, M., Kasprzyk, D., & Montano, D. (2001). Analyzing data to obtain
information to design targeted interventions. Psychology. Health & Medicine ,6, 151/C1164.
doi:10.1080/13548500120035409
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P . (2006). Does changing behavioral intentions engender behavior
change? A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Psychological Bulletin ,132(2),
249/C1268. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.132.2.249
Weinstein, N. D. (2007). Misleading tests of health behavior theories. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine ,33(1), 1/C110. doi: 10.1207/s15324796abm3301_1
Weinstein, N. D., Rothman, A. J., & Sutton, S. R. (1998). Stage theories of health behavior:
Conceptual and methodological issues. Health Psychology ,17(3), 290 /C1299. doi: 10.1037/
0278-6133.17.3.29052 K.J. Head and S.M. Noar
