Proposing a conceptual framework for integrated
local public health policy, applied to childhood
obesity - the behavior change ball
Hendriks et al.Implementation
Science
Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
DEBATE Open Access
Proposing a conceptual framework for integrated
local public health policy, applied to childhood
obesity - the behavior change ball
Anna-Marie Hendriks1*, Maria WJ Jansen1,3, Jessica S Gubbels4, Nanne K De Vries2,4, Theo Paulussen5
and Stef PJ Kremers4
Abstract
Background: Childhood obesity is a ‘wicked ’public health problem that is best tackled by an integrated approach,
which is enabled by integrated public health policies. The development and implementation of such policies have
in practice proven to be difficult, however, and studying why this is the case requires a tool that may assist local
policy-makers and those assisting them. A comprehensive framework that can help to identify options for
improvement and to systematically develop solutions may be used to support local policy-makers.
Discussion: We propose the ‘Behavior Change Ball ’as a tool to study the development and implementation of
integrated public health policies within local government. Based on the tenets of the ‘Behavior Change Wheel ’by
Michie and colleagues (2011), the proposed conceptual framework distinguishes organizational behaviors of local
policy-makers at the strategic, tactical and operational levels, as well as the determinants (motivation, capability,
opportunity) required for these behaviors, and interventions and policy categories that can influence them. To
illustrate the difficulty of achieving sustained integrated approaches, we use the metaphor of a ball in our
framework: the mountainous landscapes surrounding the ball reflect the system ’s resistance to change (by making
it difficult for the ball to roll). We apply this framework to the problem of childhood obesity prevention. The added
value provided by the framework lies in its comprehensiveness, theoretical basis, diagnostic and heuristic nature
and face validity.
Summary: Since integrated public health policies have not been widely developed and implemented in practice,
organizational behaviors relevant to the development of these policies remain to be investigated. A conceptual
framework that can assist in systematically studying the policy process may facilitate this. Our Behavior Change Ball
adds significant value to existing public health policy frameworks by incorporating multiple theoretical perspectives,
specifying a set of organizational behaviors and linking the analysis of these behaviors to interventions and policies.
We would encourage examination by others of our framework as a tool to explain and guide the development of
integrated policies for the prevention of wicked public health problems.
Keywords: Conceptual framework, Intersectoral collaboration, Integrated approach, Health policy, Childhood
obesity, Prevention, Behavior change, Organizational change, Local government
* Correspondence: anna-marie.hendriks@maastrichtuniversity.nl
1Academic Collaborative Centre for Public Health Limburg, Regional Public
Health Service, Geleen, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2013 Hendriks et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
Background
This article addresses key questions that arise within the
context of integrated public health policies ( e.g.,‘Healthy
Public Policy ’[1] or ‘Health in All Policies ’[2-4]) and in-
troduces a conceptual framework to study and guide
their development. In most countries, such policies aredeveloped by local policy-makers who work within local
governments ( i.e., municipal authorities) [3-12], so we
focus on policy development at local government level.W ef o c u so np o l i c i e st h a ta i mt op r e v e n t ‘wicked ’public
health problems [13,14] ( e.g., childhood obesity [15]), since
such problems defy traditional intra-sectoral problem-solving approaches and therefore require innovative inte-
grated approaches in which health and non-health sectors
collaborate ( i.e., intersectoral collaboration) [16-19].
Despite differences between countries or between the
states of federal countries in the involvement of national
or provincial governments, the roles, functions, and typesof governance structures [20], and in policy approaches
to public health problems ( e.g., smoking or gun control),
the core of policy development for wicked public healthissues remains similar in most countries [21-26]. In the
Netherlands, for example, the national government sets
priorities every four years that are then operationalized(i.e., developed into a health policy document) by local
policy-makers [9-12], while in the United States, most
policy priorities are set by state (rather than national)government and then operationalized by local policy-
makers [25,26]. The core of public health policy-making
with respect to wicked problems remains the need toimplement an integrated approach aimed at collabor-
ation between different (health and non-health) sectors.
Assisting local policy-makers, public health profes-sionals and researchers in developing and implementing
integrated public health policies requires a conceptual
framework to study and guide this development andimplementation effort [17,18], so our goal was to de-
velop such a framework.
Our framework was mainly inspired by the ‘Behav-
ior Change Wheel ’(BCW) (Figure 1) that was recently
presented by Michie and colleagues [27]. Since the
BCW was developed from an extensive review of
existing frameworks and has been tested in other the-
oretical domains (primary i mplementation) [27,28], it
provided a sound basis for the development of our
own framework. We extended the BCW so it could
be used as: a practical tool to assist local policy-makers and those who sup port them in overcoming
barriers to developing and i mplementing integrated
public health policies to prevent wicked public healthproblems; and as a theoretical tool to drive empirical
research and stimulate theory development in the
field of local integrated public health policies to pre-vent wicked public health problems.The development of our framework was guided by the
research question: ‘How are integrated public health pol-
icies for the prevention of wicked public health problemsdeveloped? ’Data were collected among policy actors and
categorized into ten organizational behaviors expected to
be at the core of policy development.
The aims of this paper are: to reflect on the complex-
ity of making integrated public health policy for wicked
public health problems; to reflect on the context inwhich integrated public health policies for wicked pub-
lic health problems are developed; and to introduce a
framework for the development and implementation ofintegrated public health policies. To illustrate the Be-
havior Change Ball (BCB), we use the development of
public health policies for childhood obesity preventionat the local government level as an example throughout
this article.
Why focus on childhood obesity prevention
through integrated public health policies?
Prevalence rates of childhood obesity have doubled over
the last three decades, and approximately 170 million
children (< 18 years) worldwide are now estimated to be
overweight or obese [29-32]. Childhood and adolescentobesity is associated with poorer subjective as well as ob-
jective health [33-40] and often tracks into adulthood
[41]. Consequently, it causes huge rises in healthcarecosts, affecting economic growth [42,43]. In view of these
consequences, governments are increasingly focusing
their attention on preventing childhood obesity e.g.,
[44,45]. However, though much research is available on
the determinants of childhood obesity, it has not yet been
clearly established how this information can be used todevelop effective prevention approaches [32]. The com-
plex interactions between so-called ‘thrifty genes ’[46],
consumerist life-styles and ‘obesogenic ’urban environ-
ments [47], make it difficult to decide on the right avenue
for prevention [48].
Experts argue that significant health improvements
can be achieved by focusing on factors at all levels of
society within and outside the health sector [1-4,49-57];
they therefore recommend that governments implementso-called ‘integrated approaches ’(including integrated
policies) that are characterized by a combination of
coordinated interventions by multiple organizationsand sectors, and are developed through intersectoral
collaboration, ( i.e.,‘collaboration between the most
relevant sectors within and outside the health do-main to improve public health ’[18]). Examples of
policies developed through intersectoral collaboration
are preventing the establishment of fast food restau-rants near schools and increasing the safety of play-
grounds in deprived neighborhoods. Such policies
can only be implemented if zoning policies (policiesHendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 2 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
that regulate the size, type, structure and use of land
or buildings in designated areas) developed by the de-
partment of spatial planning are aligned with the
goals of the public health department (see [58] for 93
examples of such policies). Since such integrated pol-
icies have the potential to decrease the availability of
energy-dense cheap foods and increase children ’sp h y s -
ical activity levels [59], their development is of great
interest to those who seek to prevent wicked public
health problems such as ch ildhood obesity [32,60,61].
In practice, however, a wide range of content- and
process-related factors (Table 1) [62-90] appear to
hamper the development and implementation of inte-
grated public health policies for such wicked public
health problems [91-94].
Which theories can explain integrated policy
development, and what are their limitations?
A wide range of theories can be used to explain the de-
velopment of integrated public health policies [17,18].
Some theories describe a continuum of integration e.g.,
[95-98], while others focus on intersectoral, cross-
sectoral or multisectoral collaborations, coalitions and
partnerships e.g., [99-103]. In addition, there are theories
with a broader focus, which can also be applied to under-
standing intersectoral collaboration, such as individual
behavior change theories e.g., [104], diffusion and imple-
mentation theories [105,106], and organizational change
theories e.g., [107]. Other theories describe processes of
policy-making: coalition theories [108,109] focus on the
role of policy subsystems, while technocratic [110,111],garbage-can [112,113], and incremental models [114] de-
scribe how policies are developed.
Each of the above theories offers unique and useful
insights, but they have three important limitations,
making it difficult to apply them satisfactorily to the
local government setting. First of all, most of these the-
ories apply only to specific aspects of collaboration, and
together do not provide a comprehensive approach.
Kingdon ’s stream theory [112], for example, is very use-
ful for the conceptualization of agenda setting, which is
an important part of the policy-making process, but it
is not able to account for other parts of the policy
process ( e.g., implementing policy solutions). Although
such theories are very useful for fundamental research
(in which the creation of immediately useful knowledge
is not the primary purpose) [115-117], action-oriented
researchers and especially the policy-makers themselves
need ‘actionable knowledge ’[118], i.e., knowledge that
can guide the way to solutions after barriers or facilita-
tors within the process have been identified.
A second limitation is that most of the theories are based
on research within organizational settings rather than
within governmental settings. Although we recognize that
local governments are also organizations, the conditions in
non-governmental organizations are very different from
those in local governments, so research results derived
from non-governmental settings cannot be directly trans-
ferred to that of local government [119,120]. For example,
local policy-makers have to work within a context: of pol-
icies that are delegated to them by national governments;
of a democratic political system leading to changes in
Figure 1 The behavior change wheel.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 3 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
Table 1 Barriers regarding development and implementation of integrated public health policies, as reported in the
literature
Content-related barriers Reference
Lack of awareness of the childhood obesity problem in non-health sectors. Aarts et al. [62]
The Dutch Law on Public Health has decentralized the p ublic health tasks to local governments. With regard
to jurisdiction, the public health policy domain has a p osition similar to other jurisdictions such as public
safety. In practice, however, public health is not a dom inant policy domain: resources for public health are
limited, and other jurisdictions ( e.g., public safety) are considered important issues, while health promotion is
considered less interesting, depending on the poli tical priority given to ce rtain policy domains.Law on Public Health [ 9]
Breeman et al. [63]
Steenbakkers [ 64]
‘Wicked ’nature of obesity makes it very unattractive to invest in its prevention. Head [ 14]
Head and Alford [ 19]
Decreasing the incidence of childhood obesity is ver y unlikely within the short timeframe in which most
politicians work (determined by election frequencies).Head [ 14]
Aarts et al. [62]
Romon et al. [65]
Blakely et al. [66]
Difficulty of developing consensus about ways to tackle the problem due to the lack of hard scientific
evidence about effective solutions.Han et al. [25]
Aarts et al. [62]
Head [ 14]
Trivedi et al. [67]
National Institute for Health and
Clinical Evidence [ 68]
Framing of childhood obesity (especially by neo-liberal governments) as an individual health problem
instead of a societal problem. Responsibility for achieving healthy-weight promoting lifestyles is thusshifted completely away from governments to individual children and their parents.Hunter [ 69]
Dorfman and Wallack [ 70]
Schwartz and Puhl [ 71]
Lack of political support. Aarts et al. [62]
Ambiguous political climate: governments do not seem eager to implement restrictive or legislative
policy measures since this would mean they have to confront powerful lobbies by private companies.Nestle [ 72]
Peeler et al. [73]
Lack of presence of champions and political commitment Verduin et al. [74]
Woulfe et al. [75]
Bovill [ 76]
Process-related barriersLocal government officials lacking the knowledge and skills to collaborate with actors outside their
own department.Steenbakkers [ 64]
Insufficient resources (time, budget). Aarts et al. [62]
Steenbakkers [ 64]
Woulfe et al. [75]
Lack of membership diversity in the collaborative partnerships, resulting in difficulties of implementation Woulfe et al. [75]
Lack of clarity about the notion of intersectoral collaboration. Harting et al. [17]
Not being clear about the aims and added value of the intersectoral approach. Bovill [ 76]
Top-down bureaucracy and hierarchy, disciplinarity and territoriality, sectoral budgets, and different
priorities and procedures in each sector.Bovill [ 76]
Inadequate organizational structures. Steenbakkers [ 64]
Woulfe et al. [75]
Alter and Hage [ 77]
Hunter [ 33]
Warner and Gould [ 2]
Poor quality of interpersonal or interorganizational relationships. Woulfe et al. [75]
Isett and Provan [ 78]
Top management not supporting intersectoral collaboration. Bovill [ 76]Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 4 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
government policies after every new parliamentary
election, making it difficult to work towards long-
term goals; in which mistakes made by the authorities
are highlighted in the media since citizens are critical
about the way governments spend their tax money, so
tolerance of errors is low; with a far more hierarchical
organizational structure than that of a typical non-governmental organization; and in which policy im-
plementation is often not under their own control or
in their own interest, while in non-governmental or-ganizations, policies are usually implemented by the
same organization that has developed them [76,119].
A third limitation of theories to explain the develop-
ment of integrated public health policies is that most
policy-making models are developed for simple or fairlyuncomplicated public health problems ( i.e., tame prob-
lems) [19,110,121]; such policy models fail to take into
account the factors that make policy development forcomplex public health problems ( i.e., wicked problems)
difficult (Table 1) [19,110]. Current policy models usu-
ally distinguish among several policy-making stages,such as problem definition, selecting policy solutions,
gaining political and public support for the policy solu-
tion, policy implementation, evaluation of the policy,and dissemination of effective policies [12,110]. Thesestages represent the practice of policy formulation when
clear policy goals can be established, adequate informa-
tion is available, and appropriate methods can be chosen
that can lead to activities that efficiently and effectivelyachieve these goals. However, these preconditions are vi-
olated when policies for the prevention of wicked public
health problems are developed. Since neither the prob-lem nor the solution is perceived in the same way by the
many different parties involved [19], current policy-
making models cannot be satisfactorily used to explainthe development of policies for such problems within
local governments.
To overcome these limitations, we developed a more
comprehensive conceptual framework. Although some
researchers have argued that it is unlikely that a singlecomprehensive framework can be developed [17], pro-
gress in this field can only be made if researchers are
willing to invest effort in developing such a framework.
Which theories provided the basis of our current
framework?
We used two conceptual models as the basis of our
framework. Following Jansen [83], we distinguished cat-
egories of local policy-makers ( e.g., strategic, tactical
and operational levels), and we also adopted the coreTable 1 Barriers regarding development and implementation of integrated public health policies, as reported in the
literature (Continued)
Lack of involvement by managers in collaborative efforts. Steenbakkers et al. [79]
Lack of common vision and leadership. Woulfe et al. [75]
Hunter [ 62]
Innovation in local governance is hampered by: Borins [ 80]
- asymmetric incentives that punish unsuccessful innovations much more severely than they reward
successful ones
- absence of venture capital to seed creative problem solving- disincentives lead to adverse selection: innovativ ep e o p l ec h o o s ec a r e e r so u t s i d et h ep u b l i cs e c t o r .
Adaptive management –flexibility of management required, focusing on learning by doing. Head and Alford [ 19]
Holling [ 81]
Lack of communication and insufficient joint planning. Axelsson and Axelsson [ 82]
Hierarchical governance instead of network governance Warner and Gould [ 2]
Barriers are related to the ‘niche ’character of the sectors involved: Jansen [ 83]
Achieving the unique advantage of collaboration, which is referred to as ‘synergy, ’is harder in diverse
groups, but at the same time such diverse groups have the potential to lead to greater synergy
compared to collaboration within homogeneous groups.Jansen et al. [84]
Jones [ 85]
Lasker and Weiss [ 86]
Miller andWatson and Johnson [ 87]
Hendriks et al. [88]
Hoffman et al. [89]
Paulus [ 90]
Implementation not being considered a dominant part of the planning and policy process Bovill [ 76]Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 5 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
concepts of the BCW (capability, opportunity, motiv-
ation, and behavior, or ‘COM-B ’; intervention functions,
policy categories, and the relationships between them).In addition, we integrated theories from political and
policy science, organizational science, marketing, psych-
ology, and health science [95-114] to achieve a cross-fertilization that might lead to new insights.
Extensions to the behavior change wheel
Our main inspiration was the Behavior Change Wheel
(BCW) by Michie et al. [27] (Figure 1). This framework
was developed from an extensive review of existingframeworks, and has been tested in other theoretical do-
mains (primary implementation) [28]. The function of
the BCW is to link an analysis of target behavior (the ‘B’
from the COM-B model of behavior) to intervention
functions and policies. When we tried to apply it to our
target population, i.e., local policy-makers, however, we
encountered a limitation of the BCW with regard to our
context. In our context, local policy-makers, public
health professionals and researchers would first need todefine which organizational behaviors need to be intro-
duced, reinforced or replaced for the development and
implementation of integrated public health policies. Weconsidered that pre-defining a set of organizational be-
haviors based on theories might support the users of the
framework. The current framework thus builds on theprinciples of the BCW, but modifies the ‘behavioral
goals ’by specifying relevant organizational behaviors
and linking them to policy-makers at the strategic, tac-tical and operational levels.
We wanted to provide a theoretical framework that
could function: as a practical tool to assist local policy-makers and those supporting them in overcoming bar-
riers to developing and implementing integrated public
health policies to prevent wicked public health problems;and as a theoretical tool to drive empirical research and
stimulate theory development in the field of local inte-
grated public health policies to prevent wicked publichealth problems. We therefore decided to extend the
BCW in three ways, which are outlined below.
Extension 1: different target population
In contrast to Michie et al. [27], who applied the BCW
to the behaviors of the traditional target population ofhealth-promoting interventions ( i.e., intermediaries and
the ultimate target group of people who are assisted in a
health behavior change process), we had a target popula-tion consisting of the ‘enablers ’of health promotion in-
terventions, namely local policy-makers .Furthermore,
since our target population is tied to the organization inwhich they work (the local government) we decided to
refer to their behavior as ‘organizational behavior ’rather
than just ‘behavior ’[122]. These organizational behaviorsmay consist of collective and individual behaviors and
can also be seen as critical factors or processes for the
development and implementation of integrated publichealth policies.
Extension 2: adding a second function
By adding organizational behaviors that are indicative of
an integrated approach, the ‘hub of the wheel ’becomes
not only a heuristic tool (linking an analysis of behaviorto theory-based interventions and policies) but also a
diagnostic tool within the context of local government.
Thus, the original goal of the BCW (heuristic) has beenextended by a second function: providing a structure to
categorize the most important aspects of an integrated
approach ( i.e., functioning as a diagnostic tool), as
depicted in the yellow parts of the model (Figure 2). To
include such a diagnostic function, it was necessary to
pre-define a set of organizational behaviors that will en-able an assessment of the current situation in local gov-
ernment organizations with regard to the development
and implementation of integrated public health policies.
Extension 3: adding a third dimension
Since each of the concepts in our framework canstrengthen the initiation, implementation and continu-
ation of effective policies, the dynamics of the political
and obesity-related environmental context prompted usto use the metaphor of a ball that is rolling around in a
mountainous landscape (Figures 3 and 4). This meta-
phor could explain why current implementation at-tempts have often failed. The steep hills surrounding the
ball reflect the systems ’resistance to change; the forces
of gravity make it difficult to roll a ball towards a moun-tain peak. Therefore, we decided to ‘reinvent the wheel ’
(which is two-dimensional) and develop it into a ball
(three-dimensional). The metaphor of a ball movingthrough a landscape has also been applied successfully
in other research areas to reflect the dynamics that are
at work in complex systems [123,124]. In the followingsections, we present our proposed framework, the ‘Be-
havior Change Ball, ’with which we aim to enhance em-
pirical research grounded in theory.
The behavior change ball
Before outlining the components of the ‘Behavior Change
Ball ’(BCB) (COM-B, intervention functions, and policy
categories) and its applicatio n, we describe its development
and target group.
How was the framework developed?
To identify the ten organizational behaviors (displayed inthe wedges) that need to be carried out by certain levels
of local policy-makers, we interviewed local policy-
makers at strategic, tactical, and operational levels withinHendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 6 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
several Dutch local govern ments, attended meetings
o ft h ep u b l i ch e a l t hs e r v i c ei no n eD u t c hr e g i o n ,d e -
veloped theoretical reflec tions [95-114] and held dis-
cussions with experts in the field of integrated publichealth policy development, politics, and intersectoral
collaboration. We related the organizational behaviors
to the organizational levels at which the behavior
needed to be carried out. For example, we found that
agenda setting is controlled by local policy-makers atthe strategic level ( e.g., the municipal executive),
while local policy-makers at the tactical level ( e.g.,
heads of departments) are responsible for adaptivemanagement. By categorizing these organizational be-
haviors, we aimed to integrate them into one com-
prehensive framework. Afte r having designed an early
version of this framework, we discussed it with ex-
perts and key informants. Based on their recommen-
dations, we adapted the framework where necessary.To increase the generalizability of our framework, toimprove the construct definition of its concepts, and
to raise the data to a theoretical level, we constantly
compared our data with relevant literature and simi-
lar or alternative frameworks. The outcome of thisinductive and iterative research process was our con-
ceptual framework (Figures 2, 3, 4) [125].
Who are the target group of the framework?
The target group of our framework consists of the
local policy-makers who are involved in developingintegrated public health policies. Local policy-makers
work within a complex environment in which mem-
bers of the municipal executive and local politicians(strategic level) direct local government managers
(tactical level) and professionals (operational level) to-
wards the development and implementation of certainpolicies. They can be divided into three levels
reflecting the kind of decisions they make [64,83].
Simply stated, policy-makers at the strategic level (theFigure 2 The behavior change ball, adapted from Michie et al. ’s [27] behavior change wheel. The yellow parts of the framework depict
the diagnostic function of the framework: an assessment of the policy context in which integrated public health policies should be developed
and implemented. The blue parts depict the heuristic function of the framework: based on the diagnosis, the framework guides the way to
solutions (interventions and policies). Compared to the Behavior Change Wheel, the Behavior Change Ball also specifies organizational behaviors
and relates them to the most relevant actors, categorized into three hierarchical levels that can be found in local governments; these aredisplayed as ‘wedges ’(agenda setting, leadership, policy formulation, adaptive management, network formation, innovation, teamwork, policy
formulation, and implementation) and levels (operational, tactical, strategic). In the Behavior Change Wheel, the ‘wedges ’are not specified, but
are displayed as a black dot at the center, which reflects a single specific behavioral goal [27]. Our specification of the behavioral goals into ten
wedges adds a second function to the Behavior Change Wheel, making our framework more comprehensive, which is what we needed to
explain and guide the development and implementation of integrated public health policies.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 7 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
municipal executive, known in the Netherlands as the
College of Mayor and Aldermen) decide ‘what will be
done within the organization, ’while tactical level
policy-makers (heads of departments) decide ‘how
(and sometimes also when) it will be done ’(e.g.,w h i c h
preconditions have to be fulfilled), and operational
level policy-makers (civil servants) decide ‘who will do
what and when ’(e.g., how to achieve a goal). These
levels are related to the tra ditional levels of top man-
agement, middle management, and operational man-agement [126] ,o rM i n t z b e r g ’s strategic apex, middle
line, and operational core [ 127]. To develop integrated
public health policies, these three levels should collab-orate vertically (between levels) as well as horizontally
(between the sectors within one level) [64,83].
Despite attempts to involve the ultimate ( e.g., children
and their parents) and intermediate ( e.g., commercial or-
ganizations within the community) target populations of
health-promoting interventions in the process of devel-oping policies, they are at a greater distance from the
policy-making process than the local policy-makers
themselves [128]. Therefore, we do not regard them asour key target group, but as external influences; they in-
clude, for example, international ambassadors for child-
hood obesity prevention (like Michelle Obama), expertsadvising the local policy-makers, and other levels of gov-
ernment (national, state, provincial, international).
Which organizational behaviors encourage
integrated health policies to be developed?
Ten wedges, displayed at the hub of the ball, represent a
categorization of ten organizational behaviors ( e.g.,a g e n d a
setting) that are relevant to the development of integratedpublic health policies. We decided to categorize the
organizational behaviors to a specific level of local policy-
makers. For example, agenda setting is formally theresponsibility of the municipal executive and therefore cat-
egorized under the strategic level in our proposed frame-
work. Although we acknowledge that others can influenceagenda setting ( e.g., by reminding the executive to think
about childhood obesity prevention), they are not officially
in charge of it, and are therefore considered external influ-ences situated in other parts of our proposed framework
(e.g., as determinants or interventions). Each of the
organizational behaviors is discussed in more detail below.
Organizational behavior 1: agenda setting at the
strategic level
A new policy can only be developed if a problem attracts
enough attention to appear on the political agenda [112].Figure 3 All circles can rotate independently. The Behavior Change Ball consists of circles that ref lect organizational behaviors, actors within three
hierarchical levels, determinants of organizational behaviors, interve ntions, and policies or programs. Pol icies or programs enable interventi ons, and
determinants are necessary for each of the organizational behaviors tha t are related to actors at the operational, tactical, or strategic level.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 8 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
Agenda setting is defined as: ‘the first stage of the public
policy process during which some issues are given atten-
tion by policymakers and others receive minimal attention
or are neglected completely ’[129]. In the case of childhood
obesity prevention by means of integrated approaches,
many agendas need to be set. Compared to mono-sectoral
approaches, a much wider and more diverse group has to
develop a shared vision, agree upon a strategy, and decide
to invest resources [52,129]. Only then do lower level, local
policy-makers (the tactical and operational levels) feel facil-
itated to elaborate on this shared vision [130]. A policy
entrepreneur can stimulate agenda setting [112,131]. For
example, a local alderman might visit a neighboring muni-
cipality and inspire them to give priority to childhood
obesity prevention.
Organizational behavior 2: leadership at the
strategic level
Leadership can be defined as: ‘a process of social influ-
ence ’[132]. Such influence is especially important for
the prevention of public health problems, since the ben-
efits of prevention only become visible in the long run
[32,52]. Prevention is therefore not of great interest to
most politicians, who tend to work with shorter time
frames [62,65,66,69,93]. To overcome this lack of inter-
est, leaders in the effort to improve public health shouldbe politically aware and skilled in formulating a clear, in-
tegrated vision of the public health problem: when defin-
ing the problem of childhood obesity, leaders need to
emphasize the wicked nature of obesity and guide the
search for systemic solutions [69,132,133]. For example,
an alderman can emphasize that we all have created an
‘obesogenic environment ’and that overweight children
and their parents are not solely to blame.
Organizational behavior 3: policy formulation at
the strategic level
Formulating policies is the raison d ’êtreof governments; it
is the process of translating agenda topics into a set of pol-
icy measures [134]. Policies can be formulated at the vari-
ous governmental levels, each with its own goals [135].
This section focuses on policies at the strategic level. Stra-
tegic level policies set out the vision and strategy for a
problem, guide the debate and set out the tasks for local
policy-makers at the lower levels of the municipal hierarchy
(the tactical and operational levels). They are symbolic and
aim to motivate people or create momentum, and can give
agenda topics a permanent character by securing resources
[112,135]. For example, the program proposed by the mu-
nicipal executive might include a section securing the
resources that will be invest ed in implementing the inte-
grated approach towards o verweight prevention.
Figure 4 The landscape and the behavior change ball. The proposed relationships between the theoretical concepts from the Behavior
Change Ball are best illustrated by the metaphor of a ball moving through a landscape.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 9 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
Organizational behavior 4: adaptive management
at the tactical level
The management of wicked public health problems re-
quires an adaptive approach, which is characterized by
an emphasis on learning from available evidence and
utilizing this evidence in experiments [81,136,137]. Thisis especially important when addressing problems such
as obesity, since most ‘solutions ’for childhood obesity
prevention are not yet firmly rooted in scientific evi-dence. Adaptive management is an instrument that is
used to change and learn about the system [81]. This
implies that heads of departments, who are the day-to-day managers of the officials working in local govern-
ment, should adopt an open and learning attitude and
involve people such as researchers to evaluate their pol-icies. Such an attitude stimulates the creativity of local
policy-makers at the operational level, which is needed
for the development of innovative policies [107,130]. Forexample, when managers are skeptical toward new work-
ing methods, such as intersectoral collaboration, new ex-
periences will not be created, and officials will not learnnew collaboration skills.
Organizational behavior 5: leadership at the
tactical level
Leadership at the tactical level is important since the in-
tegrated approach to childhood obesity prevention re-quires that policies are developed in a new way, viz.
through intersectoral rather than intra-sectoral collabor-
ation. Officials from different policy sectors ( e.g., spatial
planning and public health) should have the opportunity
to jointly lead the process of development and change
[138]. Leadership by the heads of the departments isexpected to be very important to facilitate this change
process; they should support their subordinates in pro-
ducing innovations [130]. For example, a manager mightcreate new performance indicators that also incentivize
officials who have successfully implemented initiatives
for the integrated approach; this can create a culture inwhich others might also want to collaborate.
Organizational behavior 6: network formation at
the operational level
A network is defined as: ‘a group of interdependent but
autonomous actors that come together to produce a col-lective output (tangible or intangible) that no one actor
could produce on its own ’[77]. Networks that also in-
volve non-health sectors should be formed to implementthe integrated approach [2-4]. To attract these non-
health stakeholders, actors from the health sectors
should move out of their ‘comfort zone ’and ‘niche ’
[83,133]. For example, spatial planning officials should be
involved in the implementation of certain policies that
require changes to physical environments. Additionally,such networks can boost agenda setting by mobilizing ac-
tors and increasing the collective capacity to confront
opponents [1,112].
Organizational behavior 7: innovation at the
operational level
Innovation is currently very important within the policy
context, since the traditional ways of solving childhood
obesity problems have failed [139]. Innovators are thegatekeepers for the introduction of new ideas into the
network. They are defined as: ‘the first individuals to
adopt an innovation ’[106]. Innovation is becoming in-
creasingly important in the policy process since national
governments are encouraging local governments to im-
plement integrated policies through public-private part-nerships. In attempts to achieve such changes, an
innovator may be the key to the exchange of new ideas
between public and private organizations and maybridge the gaps between them. For example, officials
might be motivated to use their contacts with the local
supermarket to implement some of their policy ideas,but might need to overcome resistance from others
within the organization who are afraid that the risk of
failure of such collaboration is too high.
Organizational behavior 8: teamwork at the
operational level
Based on the initiatives developed by the network, the core
of the network should take further initiatives through
‘teamwork ’:‘a set of interrelated thoughts, actions, and feel-
ings of each team member that are needed to function as a
team and that combine to facilitate coordinated, adaptive
performance and task objectives resulting in value-addedoutcomes ’[140]. Currently, actors in the public health
services are not yet fully accustomed to working in
teams that include local policy-makers from differentpolicy sectors, and thus are confronted by a totally new
w a yo fw o r k i n g .T ob ea b l et oc a p i t a l i z eo nt h e i rk n o w -
ledge and skills [141], they need other ‘new ’competencies
and tools [64,142-144], for example, spanning boundaries
between problems and solutions, and bringing diverse part-
ners together.
Organizational behavior 9: policy formulation at
the operational level
Teamwork by local policy-makers and other relevant
stakeholders results in decisions being made on the way
strategic policies are translated into operational policies(i.e.,‘work ’or‘action ’plans). They are action-oriented in-
stead of symbolic. In contrast to strategic policies, oper-
ational policies translate the policy goals into concreteactions ready for implementation. Operational planning
documents should describe the policy goals, instru-
ments, and actions in a specific, measurable, acceptable,Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 10 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
realistic, and time-bound (SMART) format [135], for ex-
ample by describing when a law will be implemented
that bans vending machines from primary schools.
Organizational behavior 10: implementation at
the operational level
Policies can only impact childhood obesity rates when they
are implemented properly, so it is very important that im-
plementation is considered a part of the planning and pol-icy process [76]. Although this seems like stating the
obvious, governments are usually judged on their policy
documents rather than on the implementation of their pol-icies [76,145]. Lack of implementation is therefore a com-
monly cited problem in the governmental context [76,119].
Usually, a package of policy measures is developed bypolicy-makers, but in the subsequent implementation
stage, most of the measures need to be implemented by
other actors than the local pol icy-makers themselves [119].
It is therefore important to involve outside stakeholders in
policy development at an early stage [74,105,106,145] and
to regularly evaluate implementation efforts to tacklecurrent implementation obstacles and anticipate potential
barriers for continuation [105,106,145].
What determinants need to be present to achieve
a particular organizational behavior?
The second circle of the model displays three categories
of interrelated determinants of behavior: capability, op-
portunity, and motivation (COM) [27] (Figures 1 –3).
These determinants are needed for each of the tenorganizational behaviors to occur. Other research fields
such as marketing e.g., [146], health sciences e.g., [147],
policy science e.g., [112], and implementation science e.
g., [28] also use this categorization. Capability, opportun-
ity, motivation, and behavior ( ‘COM-B ’) are united in a
‘behavioral system ’; if determinants are insufficiently
present, COM-B may not function appropriately, and
the behavior may not be established.
How are the determinants conceptualized?
‘Capability ’is the extent to which individuals can adapt
to change, generate new knowledge, and continue to im-prove their performance [148]: ‘capability is what people
are able to do and to be ’[149]. ‘Psychological capability ’
refers to the ability to engage in the necessary thoughtprocesses, such as comprehension and reasoning [27],
and is closely related to competence, which refers to
what individuals know or are able to do [148]. Importantaspects in the context of intersectoral collaboration are
assumed to be boundary-spanning, collaboration, and
leadership skills [69,150]. There is also a ‘physical cap-
ability, ’but this is not directly relevant to this paper [27].
‘Opportunity ’refers to conditions that are external
to the individual actor [27], that is, all social, politicaland organizational resources within a specified system
that interact with the local policy-makers [105,106].
Two forms of opportunity are distinguished: physicaland social. Physical opportunity is afforded by the en-
vironment ( e.g., organizational structures). Social op-
portunity refers to the milieu that dictates the waythat we think about things, the words and concepts
we use, and the predominant discourse ( e.g.,o r g a n i -
zational culture) [27].
‘Motivation ’can be divided into reflective and auto-
matic processes. Reflective motivation involves reflective
decision-making processes involving analytical choicesor intentions ( e.g., evaluation and plans) [27]. An ex-
ample is deciding to collaborate with other sectors since
one has positive beliefs about intersectoral collaboration.Automatic motivation involves processes in which emo-
tions and impulses that arise from associative learning
or innate dispositions lead to certain choices [27]. Exam-ples of automatic motivation are resistance to change or
work engagement [142,151-153].
Which interventions can influence the COM-B?
If the COM-B is suboptimal, interventions might be
needed to increase the likelihood that certain organizationalbehaviors are effectively accounted for [27,154]. They are
outlined below.
‘Education ’involves increasing knowledge and under-
standing [27]. Since policy sectors are not always aware
of the way their policies influence health [62], education
might increase awareness among all policy sectors andstimulate intersectoral collaboration. An example of a
tool to create such awareness is Health Impact Assess-
ment [154,155].
‘Persuasion ’means that communication is used to
elicit or enhance positive or negative feelings or to
stimulate action [27]. A national politician could, for ex-ample, persuade local, economically oriented politicians
that obesity prevention is worth investing in because of
the economic consequences of obesity in terms of workabsenteeism in the future [154].
‘Incentivization ’means that expectations of rewards
are created [27]. Incentivization is based on marketingand learning theory principles of direct reinforcement
[146,156]. Reward systems that are built into the
organizational structure, such as bonuses, are an ex-ample of incentivization since they can stimulate individ-
uals by offering financial rewards [154].
‘Coercion ’means the use of punishment or costs [27],
for example to force municipalities to subject their pol-
icies to a Health Impact Assessment [154,155].
‘Training ’can be used to overcome skills-related prob-
lems [27]. For example, attracting the right stakeholders
for the development of integrated policies requires nego-
tiation skills that might be trained [154].Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 11 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
‘Restriction ’refers to rules defining which behaviors
are allowed or not allowed [27]. Institutions incorporate
not only formal rules but also informal rules that shapethe behavior of those working in them and thus may
hamper intersectoral collaboration [157]. For example,
performance management can restrict collaboration, es-pecially when tight budgets result in a tendency to re-
turn to ‘core business ’[154].
‘Environmental restructuring ’is intended to change
the social or physical context [27]. Changes in the social
context refer to changes in culture ( e.g., pressure from
the media), while changes in the physical context referto changes in the structure ( e.g., institutional arrange-
ments) [154,157,158]. A good example is the work of ce-
lebrity chef Jamie Oliver: media attention has enabledhim to put the poor quality of school lunches on the
political agenda.
‘Modeling ’provides an example that people can and
like to copy [27]. It is based on social learning theories
[156]. Managers may act as a model for the type of
collaboration they want to encourage across policy sec-tors [64,79,154], and well-known mayors like Michael
Bloomberg [159] may act as models to invest in local
obesity prevention through policies [154].
‘Enablement ’means creating new ways to deal with or
remove barriers [27]. At the strategic level, for example,
a barrier to intersectoral collaboration, viz.‘not having a
shared goal, ’might be removed by an official having two
policy sectors, such as spatial planning and public
health, in their portfolio [154].
Which policies can enable the interventions?
Nine policies are displayed in the outermost circle. Theyenable particular interventions and are outlined below [27].
‘Communication and marketing ’involves using print,
electronic media, telephone or broadcast media [27]. Forexample, in order to achieve broad political commitment
for the prevention of childhood obesity, a local alderman
might be appointed as ambassador.
‘Guidelines ’involve documents that recommend or
mandate practice [27]. An example might be using a
contract to formalize network activities to make surethat commitments for investing in childhood obesity
prevention are followed up.
‘Fiscal measures ’involve the use of the tax system to re-
duce or increase the financial cost of certain activities that
might affect childhood obesity, for example by subsidizing
municipalities that develop a nd implement integrated pub-
lic health policies. Such financial support can stimulate
local governments to invest in intersectoral collaboration,
since innovating current working practices often requiresadditional investment of resources [105,106].
‘Regulation ’involves establishing rules or principles of
behavior or practice [27]. Pooling resources, for example,can be seen as a working principle that fosters intersectoral
collaboration; when targets are set for the governmental
system as a whole, officials from the economic or spatialplanning departments can share resources with health
sectors and therefore become direct stakeholders of pub-
lic health.
‘Legislation ’involves making or changing laws [27].
Laws aim to change behavior in a non-voluntary manner
[146]. An example is the Dutch law on public health; theDutch national government obliges local governments to
produce a health policy document every four years [9],
and the Health Care Inspectorate checks whether thelaws are adhered to [160].
‘Environmental or social planning ’involves designing
and/or controlling the physical or social environment[27]. An example is giving attention to the design of
the organizational structure so it does not obstruct
intersectoral collaboration.
‘Service provision ’involves delivering services [27]. Ex-
amples include offering specific training courses for civil
servants who want to use social marketing to preventobesity, or training courses on how to select evidence-
based interventions.
How can the behavior change ball be applied?
The framework can be applied within local governments
by local policy-makers or those who assist them ( e.g.,
action-oriented researchers) to develop and implement
integrated public health policy for the prevention of
wicked public health problems. It can be applied forpractical or theoretical purposes.
For practical purposes, the following four steps should be
taken. First, identify the local policy-makers ’organizational
behaviors that are described in the wedges of the ball ( i.e.,
not assessing the COM-B from scratch as in the BCW); this
assessment should identify which organizational behaviorsneed to be introduced, reinforced, or replaced. For example,
it may become clear that childhood obesity prevention is
not on the agenda of the aldermen who is responsible for it(agenda setting). Second, bas ed on the identification of the
organizational behaviors that need attention, an analysis of
the COM-B needs to indicate what might be an import-ant avenue for improvement. For example, to set the
agenda, the aldermen might first need to be informed
about the severity of childhood obesity (agenda settingthrough increasing motivation). Michie et al. [27] describe
how to select appropriate interventions (third) and policies
or programs (fourth) to change the COM-B. For example,communication (policy) enables modeling (intervention)
and influences automatic motivation, which may lead to
agenda setting (organizational behavior) at the strategiclevel (our target population).
For theoretical purposes and to enable further study,
the BCB can be used to structure or map data. ForHendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 12 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
example, the BCB ’s constructs can be used as topic
lists or coding systems, or to map data from observa-
tions, interviews, or policy documents. Applying theBCB may reveal the value of certain theories in
explaining the development and implementation of in-
tegrated public health policies and thus provide direc-tions for further research.
What are the limitations of this study?
A limitation of this study is that the linkages it identifies
between the organizational behaviors are based on one
research study. Although we grounded the linkages inexisting theoretical assumptions and literature, we ac-
knowledge that they should be further tested. We there-
fore hope to inspire other researchers to conduct moretheory-based empirical research to validate and refine
the BCB. Another limitation of this study could be
that this framework was developed in the Netherlands,and may thus not be valid for countries where local
governments bear less responsibility for developing
public health policies. Also, our categorization of localgovernment actors might appear less appropriate in
some countries, although similar categories frequently
appear in other theoretical reflections [64,83,126,127].To increase the value of the framework, we have linked
our categorization of policy-makers (strategic, tactical
and operational) to internationally familiar managementconcepts [126,127].
What are the directions for future research?
By introducing the BCB in the field, we aim to stimulate
local policy-makers and those who support them ( e.g.,
researchers) to think about the organizational behaviorsthat are relevant to developing and implementing inte-
grated public health policies. We want to strengthen the
evidence base regarding the reality of policy formulationand implementation, and therefore recommend that re-
searchers apply the BCB in case study designs or narra-
tive inquiries. Such research designs are seen as mostappropriate due to their potential to illuminate the dy-
namic policy process [125,161]. It is our hope that use of
the BCB will lead to its further development as a prac-tical and theoretical tool to explore the barriers and fa-
cilitators for developing integrated public health policies.
Summary
This paper has tried to answer some key questions
within the context of integrated local public health pol-icies and has introduced a comprehensive framework
that can map the various aspects relevant to the devel-
opment and implementation of such policies. Theframework was developed by translating and extending
the key assumptions of the ‘Behavior Change Wheel ’
(BCW) [27] within a framework called the ‘BehaviorChange Ball ’(BCB). Since the BCW and BCB are
designed to be applied in different contexts and for dif-
ferent purposes, we propose that both frameworksshould co-exist. Throughout our article, we used child-
hood obesity prevention as an example, since this is a
typical wicked problem that requires integrated prevent-ive public health policies. We encourage researchers who
are trying to support local policy-makers to apply the
framework and report their experiences.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
AMH carried out the interviews and literature search, and drafted the
manuscript. MJ and SK conceived of the study and helped to draft themanuscript. JG, TP, and NdV helped to draft the manuscript. All authors readand approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
This study was funded by ZonMw, the Netherlands Organization for HealthResearch and Development (project no. 200100001) and is part of the CIAO
(Consortium Integrated Approach Overweight), a research consortium of five
Academic Collaborative Centers.
Author details
1Academic Collaborative Centre for Public Health Limburg, Regional Public
Health Service, Geleen, The Netherlands.2Department of Health Promotion,
Caphri, School of Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht University,Maastricht, The Netherlands.
3Department of Health Services Research,
Caphri, School of Public Health and Primary Care, Maastricht University,
Maastricht, The Netherlands.4Department of Health Promotion, NUTRIM,
School for Nutrition, Toxicology and Metabolism, Maastricht University,Maastricht, The Netherlands.
5TNO (Netherlands Organisation of Applied
Scientific Research) Healthy Living, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Received: 5 October 2012 Accepted: 8 April 2013
Published: 18 April 2013
References
1. Kickbusch I, McCann W, Sherbon T: Adelaide revisited: from healthy public
policy to health in All policies. Health Promot Int 2008, 23:1–4.
2. Warner M, Gould N: Integrating Health in All policies at the local levels:
using network governance to create ‘virtual reorganization by design. In
Policy innovations for Health. Edited by Kickbusch I. New York: Springer;
2009:125 –163.
3. Kickbusch I: Policy innovations for health. New York: Springer; 2009.
4. Storm I, Verweij A, Van der Lucht F: Integraal gezondheidsbeleid op lokaal
niveau. Wat weten we en hoe nu verder? [local integrated health policy. Whatdo we know and how to proceed?]. Bilthoven: Rijksinstituut voor
Volksgezondheid en Milieu (RIVM); 2012.
5. Atkinson S, Medeiros RLR, Oliveira PH, De Almeida RD: Going down to the
local: incorporating social organisation and political culture intoassessments of decentralised health care. Soc Sci Med 2000, 51:619 –636.
6. Exworthy ML: Policy to tackle the social determinants of health: using
conceptual models to understand the policy process. Health Policy Plan
2008, 23:318 –327.
7. Bossert TJ: Analyzing the decentralization of health systems in developing
countries: decision space, innovation, and performance. Soc Sci Med 1998,
47:1513 –1527.
8. Maas J, Storm I: Integraal gezondheidsbeleid op nationaal niveau. Wat kunnen
we leren van de ervaringen uit andere landen? integrated health policies at
national level. What can we learn from experiences in other countries?
Bilthoven: Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu (RIVM); 2011.
9. Rijksoverheid: Wet publieke gezondheid. Law on public health. 2008. http://
wetten.overheid.nl/BWBR0024705/geldigheidsdatum_08-01-2010.
10. Vereniging van Nederlandse Gemeenten (VNG): Toekomstvisie op publieke
gezondheid maatschappelijke vraagstukken centraal - verbinden verschillendebeleidsdomeinen. Policy outlook on public health: focus on social issues –linkingHendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 13 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
policy domains. 2009. http://www.vng.nl/files/vng/vng/Documenten/Extranet/
Sez/OGZ/Toekomstvisie%20pu blieke%20gezondheid.pdf.
11. De Leeuw E, Poelman L: Health policy making: the Dutch experience. Soc
Sci Med 1995, 40:331 –338.
12. Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu (RIVM): Handreiking gezonde
gemeente: de beleidscyclus. 2011. http://www.loketgezondleven.nl/object_
binary/o10855_Factsheet%20Beleidscyclus%20DEF%20aangepast.pdf.
13. Rittel HWJ, Webber MM: Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy
Sciences 1973, 4:155 –169.
14. Head BW: Wicked problems in public policy. Public Policy 2008, 3:101 –118.
15. Butland B, Jebbe S, Kopelman P, McPherson K, Thomas S, Mardell J, Parry V:
Tackling obesity: future choices –project report. 2007. http://www.bis.gov.uk/
assets/foresight/docs/obesity/17.pdf.
16. Yach D, McKee M, Lopez AD, Novotny T: Improving diet and physical
activity: 12 lessons from controlling tobacco smoking. BMJ 2005,
330:898 –900.
17. Harting J, Paauwe L, Stronks K: Theoretische perspectieven op intersectorale
samenwerking en integraal beleid. Een thematische review. Theoreticalperspectives on intersectoral collaboration and integrated policy: thematic
review. Amsterdam: AMC Sociale Geneeskunde; 2011.
18. Storm I, Van Zoest L, Den Broeder L: Integraal gezondheidsbeleid: theorie en
toepassing. Integrated health policy: theory and practice. 2007. http://www.
rivm.nl/bibliotheek/rapporten/270851003.html.
19. Head B, Alfod J: Wicked problems: the implications for public management.
2008. http://www.irspm2008.bus.qut.edu.au/papers/documents/pdf2/Head%
20-%20Wicked%20Problems%20HeadAlford%20Final%20250308.pdf.
20. The Council of European Municipalities and Regions: Local and regional
government in Europe - structures and competences. 2012. http://www.ccre.
org/docs/publication-structures-2012-en.pdf.
21. Eurostat: Government statistics. 2008 –2012. http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/
portal/page/portal/government_finance_statistics/data/main_tables.
22. Bach S, Stroleny A: Social dialogue and the public services in the
aftermath of the economic crisis: strengthening partnership in an era of
austerity. Industrial Relations and Social Dialogue 2013:1 –71. http://www.kcl.
ac.uk/sspp/departments/management/Comparative-Report.doc.
23. Department of Health: The new public health role of local authorities. 2012.
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/127045/Public-health-role-of-local-authorities-factsheet.pdf.pdf.
24. Australian Government: Australia ’s Public health infrastructure today. 1998.
http://www.nphp.gov.au/publications/broch/sectn003.htm.
25. Sebelius K: U.S. Department of health & human services. 2012. http://www.
hhs.gov/about/whatwedo.html.
26. Buse K, Mays N, Walt G: Making health policy.
Milton Keynes, UK: Open
University Press; 2005.
27. Michie S, Van Stralen MM, West R: The behaviour change wheel: a new
method for characterising and designi ng behaviour change interventions.
Implementation Science 2011, 6:1–12.
28. Cane J, O ’Connor D, Michie S: Validation of the theoretical domains
framework for use in behaviour change and implementation research.
Implementation Science 2012, 7:1–17.
29. Lobstein T, Baur L, Uauy R: Obesity in children and young people: a crisis
in public health. Obes Rev 2004, 5:4–85.
30. World Health Organization: Childhood overweight and obesity. 2013. http://
www.who.int/dietphysicalactivity/childhood/en/.
31. Schönbeck Y, Van Buuren S: Factsheet resultaten vijfde landelijke groeistudie.
[Factsheet: results of the fifth national study of child growth]. 2010. http://
www.loketgezondleven.nl/object_binary/o10190_20100608-Factsheet-
Resultaten-Vijfde-Landelijke-Groeistudie.pdf.
32. Han JC, Lawlor DA, Kimm SYS: Childhood obesity 2010: progress and
challenges. Lancet 2010, 375:1737 –1748.
33. Ottova V, Erhart M, Rajmil L, Dettenborn-Betz L, Ravens-Sieberer U: Overweight
and its impact on the health-related quality of life in children and
adolescents: results from the European KIDSCREEN survey. Qual Life Res 2012,
21:59–69.
34. Analitis F, Velderman MK, Ravens-Sie b e r e rU ,D e t m a rS ,E r h a r tM ,H e r d m a nM ,
Berra S, Alonso J, Rajmil L: Being bullied: associated factors in children and
adolescents 8 to 18 years old in 11 European countries. Pediatrics 2009,
123:569 –577.
35. Britz B, Siegfried W, Ziegler A, Lamertz C, Herpertz-Dahlmann BM,
Remschmidt H, Wittchen H-U, Hebebrand J: Rates of psychiatric disorders
in a clinical study group of adolescents with extreme obesity and inobese adolescents ascertained via a population based study. Int J Obes
Relat Metab Disord 2000, 24:1707 –1714.
36. Daniels SR: The consequences of childhood overweight and obesity.
Future Child 2006, 16:47–67.
37. Marcus MD, Foster GD, El Ghormli L, Baranowski T, Goldberg L, Jago R,
Linder B, Steckler A, Treviño R: Shifts in BMI category and associated
cardiometabolic risk: prospective results from HEALTHY study. Pediatrics
2012, 129:983 –991.
38. Visness CM, London SJ, Daniels JL, Kaufman JS, Yeatts KB, Siega-Riz AM,
Calatroni A, Zeldin DC: Association of childhood obesity with atopic and
nonatopic asthma: results from the national health and nutritionexamination survey 1999 –2006. J Asthma 2010, 47:822 –829.
39. Sinatra FR: Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease in pediatric patients. Journal of
Parental and Enteral Nutrition 2012, 36:65–71.
40. Bonuck K, Freeman K, Chervin RD, Xu L: Sleep-disordered breathing in a
population-based cohort: behavioral outcomes at 4 and 7 years.Pediatrics 2012, 129:857 –865.
41. Freedman DS, Khan LK, Serdula MK, Dietz WH, Srinivasan SR, Berenson GS:
The relation of childhood BMI to adult adiposity: the Bogalusa heart
study. Pediatrics 2005, 115:22–27.
42. Mayer-Foulkes D: A survey of macro damages from Non-communicable
chronic diseases: another challenge for global governance. Global
Economy Journal 2011, 11:1–27.
43. Gortmaker SL, Swinburn BA, Levy D, Carter R, Mabry PE, Finegood DT,
Huang T, Marsh T, Moodie ML: Changing the future of obesity: science,
policy, and action. Lancet 2011, 378:838 –874.
44. Schepper R: Let’s Move cities and towns: toolkit for local officials. 2011. http://
www.villageoffranklinpark.com/DownloadTracking.aspx?DocumentId=542.
45. Davis A: Value for money: an economic assessment of investment in walking
and cycling. 2010. http://www.healthyweight4children.org.uk/resource/item.
aspx?RID=90422.
46. Neel JV: Diabetes mellitus: a “thrifty ”genotype rendered detrimental by
“progress ”?Am J Hum Genet 1962, 14:353 –362.
47. Swinburn B, Egger G, Raza F: Dissecting obesogenic environments: the
development and application of a framework for identifying and
prioritizing environmental interventions for obesity. Prev Med 1999,
29:563 –570.
48. Kremers SPJ, De Bruijn GJ, Visscher TLS, Van Mechelen W, De Vries NK, Brug J:
Environmental influences on energy balance-related behaviors: a dual-process view. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act 2006, 3:
1–10.
49. Storm I, Savelkoul M, Busch MCM, Maas J, Schuit AJ: Intersectoraal samenwerken
in de aanpak van gezondheidsachterstan den: een onderzoek onder 16 gemeenten
in nederland. Intersectoral collaboration to address health deficits: a survey of 16
Dutch municipalities. Bilthoven: Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu
(RIVM); 2010.
50. Kreuter MW, De Rosa C, Howze EH, Baldwin GT: Understanding wicked
problems: a key to advancing environmental health promotion. Health
Educ Behav 2004, 31:441 –454.
51. Weber EP, Khademian AM: Wicked problems, knowledge challenges, and
collaborative capacity builders in network settings. Public Adm Rev 2008,
68:334 –349.
52. World Health Organization: Social determinants of health - the solid facts. 2003.
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0005/98438/e81384.pdf.
53. Dahlgren G, Whitehead M: Policies and strategies to promote social equity in
health. Stockholm: Institute for Future Studies; 1991.
54. World Health Organization: The Ottawa charter for health promotion. 1986.
http://www.who.int/healthpromotion/conferences/previous/ottawa/en/index.html.
55. Public Health Agency of Canada: Crossing sectors - experiences in intersectoral
action, public policy and health. 2007. http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/publicat/
2007/cro-sec/pdf/cro-sec_e.pdf.
56. Inspectie voor de Gezondheidszorg. The Dutch Health Care Inspectorate:
Staat van de gezondheidszorg. Meer effect mogelijk van publieke
gezondheidszorg. The current state of health care: achieving greater effects
with public health care. 2010. http://www.igz.nl/Images/2010-03%20Staat%
20van%20de%20Gezondheidszorg%202010_tcm294-275233.pdf.
57. Raphael D: Addressing the social determinants of health in Canada:
bridging the gap between research findings and public policy. Policy
Options 2003, 24:35–40.
58. The Report of the National Taskforce on Obesity: Obesity: the policy challenges.
2005. http://www.bvsde.paho.org/texcom/nutricion/taskforce.pdf.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 14 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
59. Kahn LK, Sobush K, Keener D, Goodman K, Lowry A, Kakietek J, Zaro S:
Recommended community strategies and measurements to prevent obesity in
the united states. 2009. http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/
rr5807a1.htm.
60. Franco M, Orduñez P, Caballero B, Cooper RS: Obesity reduction and its
possible consequences: what can we learn from Cuba ’s special period?
Canadian Medical Association 2008, 178:1032 –1034.
61. Wells JCK: The evolution of human adiposity and obesity: where did it all
go wrong? Dis Model Mech 2012, 5:595 –607.
62. Aarts M-J, Jeurissen MPJ, Van Oers HAM, Schuit AJ, Van de Goor LAM: Multi-
sector policy action to create activity-friendly environments for children:
a multiple-case study. Health Policy 2011, 101:11–19.
63. Breeman G, Timmermans A, Van Dalfsen F: Politiek van de aandacht voor het
nederlandse veiligheidsbeleid. Politics of awareness of Dutch safety policies.2011. http://wodc.nl/onderzoeksdatabase/politiek-van-de-aandacht.aspx.
64. Steenbakkers M: Lokaal integraal gezondheidsbeleid: realistische uitdaging of
utopie? Een onderzoek binnen gemeenten naar mogelijkheden tot
intersectorale samenwerking. [Local integrated health policy: realistic
challenge or utopian dream? a study of opportunities for intersectoralcollaboration in local government]. InPhD Thesis. Maastricht: Maastricht
University, Academic Collaborative Centre of Public Health Zuid Limburg; 2012.
65. Romon M, Lommez A, Tafflet M, Basdevant A, Oppert JM, Bresson JL,
Ducimetrière P, Charles MA, Borys JM: Downward trends in the prevalence
of childhood overweight in the setting of 12-year school- andcommunity-based programs. Public Health Nutr 2009, 12:1735 –1742.
66. Blakely TA, Kennedy BP, Glass R, Kawachi I: What is the lag time between
income inequality and health status? J Epidemiol Community Health 2000,
54:318 –319.
67. Trivedi NJ, Fields J, Mechanick CH, Klein M, Mechanick JI: Lack of correlation
between anti-obesity policy and obesity growth rates: review and analysis.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists 2012, 18:737 –744.
68. National Institute for Health and Clinical Evidence: Preventing obesity: a
whole-system approach: call for evidence. 2010. http://www.nice.org.uk/
guidance/index.jsp?action=folder&o=48269.
69. Hunter DJ: Leading for health and wellbeing: the need for a new paradigm.
J Public Health 2009, 31:202 –204.
70. Dorfman L, Wallack L: Moving nutrition upstream: the case for reframing
obesity. J Nutr Educ Behav 2007, 39:45–50.
71. Schwartz MB, Puhl R: Childhood obesity: a societal problem to solve. Obes
Rev
2003, 4:57–71.
72. Nestle M: Food industry and health: mostly promises, little action. Lancet
2006, 368:564 –565.
73. Peeler CL, Kolish ED, Enright M, Burke C: The children ’s food & beverage
advertising initiative in action. Arlington, USA: Council of Better Business
Bureaus; 2010. http://www.bbb.org/us/storage/0/Shared%20Documents/BBBwithlinks.pdf.
74. Verduin P, Agarwal S, Waltman S: Solutions to obesity: perspectives from
the food industry. Am J Clin Nutr 2005, 82:259 –261.
75. Woulfe J, Oliver TR, Zahner SJ, Siemering KQ: Multisector partnerships in
population health improvement. Prev Chronic Dis 2010, 7:1–7.
76. Bovill C: Rhetoric or reality? cross-sector policy implementation at the UK
government department for international development. Policy and
Politics 2009, 37:179 –199.
77. Alter C, Hage J: Organizations working together: coordination in
interorganizational networks. Newbury Park, USA: Sage; 1993.
78. Isett KR, Provan KG: The evolution of dyadic intero rganizational relationships
in a network of publicly funded nonprofit agencies. Journal of Public
Administration Research and Theory 2005, 15:149 –165.
79. Steenbakkers M, Jansen MWJ, Maarse H, De Vries NK: Sturing op integraal
gezondheidsbeleid: de rol van gemeentelijke afdelingshoofden. Governancefor integrated health policy: the r ole of heads of local government
departments. TSG: Tijdschrift voor Gezondheidswetenschappen 2011, 89:266 –273.
80. Borins S: Innovation in the public sector. Journal of Intellectual Capital
2001, 2:310 –319.
81. Holling CS: Adaptive environmental assessment and management. Chichester:
Wiley; 1978.
82. Axelsson R, Axelsson SB: Integration and collaboration in public health –a
conceptual framework. Int J Health Plann Manage 2006, 21:75–88.
83. Jansen M: Mind the gap: collaboration between practice, policy and research
in local public health. Maastricht University, Health Promotion Department:
PhD Thesis; 2007.84. Jansen MWJ, Van Oers HAM, Kok G, De Vries NK: Public health: disconnections
between policy, practice and research. Health Research Policy and Systems
2010, 8:37–51.
85. Jones J, Barry MM: Developing a scale to measure synergy in health
promotion partnerships. Glob Health Promot 2011, 18:36–44.
86. Lasker RD, Weiss ES, Miller R: Partnership synergy: a practical framework
for studying and strengthening the collaborative advantage. Milbank Q
2001, 79:179 –205.
87. Watson SPWE, Johnson L: The effects of competition on the decision quality
of diverse and nondiverse groups. J Appl Psychol 1998, 28:912 –923.
88. Hendriks AM, Kremers SPJ, Gubbels JS, Raat H, De Vries NK, Jansen MWJ:
Towards health in All policies for childhood obesity prevention. Journal
of Obesity 2013, 2013: 1–12.
89. Hoffman LR, Norman AMD, Maier RF: Quality and acceptance of problem
solutions by members of homogeneous and heterogeneous groups.
J Abnorm Soc Psychol 1981, 62:401 –407.
90. Paulus P: Groups, teams, and creativity: the creative potential of idea
generating groups. Applied Psychology 2000, 49:237 –262.
91. Castell-Florit P: Intersectoral health strategies: from discourse to action.
MEDICC Rev 2010, 12:48.
92. O ’Neill M: Intersectoral collaboration: the best of times, the worst of
times. Health Promot Int 1997, 12:1–3.
93. Bacigalupe A, Esnaola S, Mart U, Zuazagoitia J: Learning lessons from past
mistakes: how can health in All policies fulfill its promises? J Epidemiol
Community Health 2010, 64:504 –505.
94. Kickbusch I, Gleicher D: Governance for health in the 21st century. 2012.
http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/171334/RC62BD01-
Governance-for-Health-Web.pdf.
95. Himmelman AT: Collaboration for a change: definitions, decision-making roles,
and collaboration process guide. Minneapolis: Himmelman Consulting; 2002.
96. Konrad EL: A multidimensional framework for conceptualizing human service
integration initiatives. Evaluating Initiatives to Integrate Human Services: A
Publication of the American Evaluation Association 1996, 1996: 5–19.
97. Brown LD, Feinberg ME, Greenberg MT: Measuring coalition functioning:
refining constructs through factor analysis. Health Educ Behav 2012,
39:486 –497.
98. Emerson K, Nabatchi T, Balogh S: An integrative framework for collaborative
governance. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 2011, 22:1–29.
99. Blockson LC: Multisector approaches to societal issues management.
Business Society 2003, 42:381 –390.
100. Gray B: Conditions facilitating interorganizational collaboration. Human
Relations 1985, 38:911 –936.
101. Gray B: Collaborating. San Francisco: Josses-Bass; 1989.
102. Dowling B, Powell M, Glendinning C: Conceptualising successful
partnerships. Health Soc Care Community 2004, 12:309 –317.
103. Wagemakers A, Koelen MA, Lezwijn J, Vaandrager L: Coordinated action
checklist: a tool for partnerships to facilitate and evaluate community.Glob Health Promot 2010, 17:17–29.
104. Ajzen I: The theory of planned behavior. Organ Behav Hum Decis Process
1991, 50:179 –211.
105. Paulussen T, Wiefferink K, Mesters I: Invoering van effectief gebleken
interventies. Implementing interventions that have proved effective. In
Gezondheidsvoorlichting en gedragsverandering. 5th edition. Edited by Brug J,
Van Assema P, Lechner L. Assen: Van Gorcum; 2007:151 –172.
106. Rogers EM: Diffusion of innovations. New York: Free Press; 2003.
107. Senge P: The fifth discipline: the art and practice of the learning organization.
New York: Doubleday; 1990.
108. Sabatier PA: An advocacy coalition framework of policy change and the
role of policy oriented learning therein. Policy Sciences 1988, 21:129 –168.
109. Sabatier PA: Towards better theories of the policy process. Political Science
and Politics 1991,
24:147 –156.
110. Putters K: HIA, the next step: defining models and roles. Environmental
Impact Assessment Review 2005, 25:693 –701.
111. Bressers JTA, Hoogerwerf A: Beleidsevaluatie. Alphen aan den Rijn: Samsom
HD Tjeenk Willink; 1995.
112. Kingdon JW: Agendas, alternatives and public policies. New York: Addison-
Wesley Educational Publishers Inc.; 2003.
113. Cohen MD, March JG, Olsen JP: A garbage Can model of organizational
choice. Adm Sci Q 1972, 17:1–35.
114. Lindblom CE: The science of “muddling through ”.Public Adm Rev 1959,
19:79–88.Hendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 15 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
115. Huxham C: Action research as a methodology for theory development.
Policy & Politics 2003, 31:239 –248.
116. Corey SM: Action research, fundamental research, and educational
practices. Teachers College Record 1949, 50:509 –514.
117. Susman GI, Roger DE: An assessment of the scientific merits of action
research. Adm Sci Q 1978, 23:582 –603.
118. Small SA, Uttal L: Action-oriented research: strategies for engaged
scholarship. Journal of Marriage and Family 2005, 67:936 –948.
119. LaPalombera J: Power and politics in organizations: public and private
sector comparisons. InHandbook of organizational learning. Edited by
Dierkes M, Antal AB, Child J, Nonaka I. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2001.
120. Rousseau DM, Fried Y: Location, location, location: contextualizing
organizational research. Journal of Organizational Behavior 2001, 22:1–13.
121. Humphreys JS, Kuipers P, Wakerman J, Wells R, Jones JA, Kinsman LD: How
far can systematic reviews inform policy development for ‘wicked ’rural
health service problems? Aust Health Rev 2009, 33:592 –600.
122. Robbins SP, Judge TA: Organizational behavior. New Jersey: Prentice Hall; 2011.
123. Thelen E, Smith LB: Dynamic systems theories. InHandbook of child
psychology. Volume 1. 6th edition. Edited by Damon W, Lerner RM. New
York: Willey; 2006:258 –312.
124. Magnusson D, Stattin H: The person in context: a holistic- interactionistic
approach. InHandbook of child psychology. Volume 1. 6th edition. Edited by
Damon W, Lerner RM. New York: Willey; 2006:400 –464.
125. Eisenhardt KM: Building theories from case study research. Acad Manage
Rev1989, 14:532 –550.
126. Anthony R: Planning and control systems: a framework for analysis. Cambridge:
Harvard University Graduate School o f Business Administration; 1965.
127. Mintzberg H: Structure in fives. Designing effective organizations. New Jersey:
Prentice-Hall; 1993.
128. Lukes S: Power: a radical view. London: Macmillan; 1974.
129. Schiffman J: Generation of political priority for global health initiatives: a
framework and case study of maternal mortality. Am J Public Health 2007,
97:796 –803.
130. Kotter JP: Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. Harv Bus Rev
1995, 73:59–67.
131. Hoeijmakers M, De Leeuw E, Kenis P, De Vries NK: Local health policy
development processes in the Netherlands: an expanded toolbox for
health promotion. Health Promot Int 2007, 22:112 –121.
132. Parry KW, Hansen H: The organizational story as leadership. Leadership
2007, 3:281 –300.
133. Jansen MWJ: All healthcare workers: put on your high heels. 2012. http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=LHmXY5vq1Bw.
134. McGee R, Brock K: From poverty assessment to policy change: processes actors
and data. Brighton: Institute of Development studies; 2001.
135. Whitehead M, Scott-Samuel A, Dahlgren G: Setting targets to address
inequalities in health. Lancet 1998, 351:1279 –1282.
136. Brunner RD: Adaptive governance as a reform strategy. Policy Sciences
2010, 43:301 –341.
137. Batie SS: Wicked problems and applied economics. American Journal of
Agricultural Economics 2008, 90:1176 –1191.
138. Harris A, Spillane J: Distributed leadership through the looking glass.
Management in Education 2008, 22:31–34.
139. Lobstein T, Bauer LA: Policies to prevent childhood obesity in the European
union. Eur J Public Health 2005, 15:576 –579.
140. Salas E, Sims DE, Burke CS: Is there a big five in team work? Eur J Public
Health 2005, 15:576 –579.
141. West MA: Sparkling fountains or stagnant ponds: an integrative model of
creativity and innovation implementation in work groups. Applied
Psychology: An International Review 2002, 51:355 –424.
142. Campell RJ: Change management in health care. Health Care Manag 2008,
27:23–39.
143. Mellaard A, Spanbroek K: De GGD als advies- en regie-instituut. Regional
public health services as advisory and supervisory institutes. TSG
Tijdschrift voor Gezondheidswetenschappen 2008, 86:383 –384.
144. Bridges W: Managing transitions: making the most of change. Cambridge:
Perseus Publishing; 2003.
145. Steckler A, Goodman R, Kegler MC: Mobilizing organizations for health
enhancement: theories of organizational change. InHealth behavior and
health education: theory, research and practice. Edited by Glanz K, Rimer BK,
Lewis FM. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass; 2002:335 –360.146. Rotschild ML: Carrots, stick, and promises: a conceptual framework for
the management of public health and social issue behaviors. Journal of
Marketing 1999, 63:24–37.
147. The Health Council: Health and behavior. 2002. http://www.rvz.net/uploads/
docs/Advies_-_Gezondheid_en.pdf.
148. Fraser SW, Greenhalgh T: Coping with complexity: educating capability.
BMJ 2001, 323:799 –803.
149. Sen AK: Commodities and capabilities. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1985.
150. Yip J, Wong S, Ernst C: The nexus effect: when leaders span group
boundaries. Leadership in Action 2008, 28:13–17.
151. Schaufeli WB: Work engagement. What Do We know and where Do We
Go? Romanian Journal of Applied Psychology 2012, 14:3–10.
152. Bakker AB, Demerouti E: The crossover of work engagement between
working couples: a closer look at the role of empathy. Journal of
Managerial Psychology 2009, 24:220 –236.
153. Christian MS, Garza AS, Slaughter JE: Work engagement: a quantitative
review and test of its relations with task and contextual performance.
Personnel Psychology 2011, 64:89–136.
154. Hendriks AM, Kremers SPJ, Jansen MWJ, Seidel JC, De Vries NK, Gubbels JS:
Interventions to promote an integrated approach to public health
problems - an application to childhood obesity. Journal of Environmental
and Public Health 2012, 2012: 1–14.
155. Manheimer LN, Gulis G, Lehto J, Östlin P: Introducing health impact
assessment: an analysis of political and administrative intersectoral
working methods. Eur J Public Health 2007, 17:526 –531.
156. Bandura A: Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall; 1977.
157. Peters GB: Institutional theory in political science: the “new institutionalism ”.
London: Continuum International Publishing Group; 2005.
158. Unger JP, Macq J, Bredo F, Boelaert M: Through Mintzberg ’s glasses: a
fresh look at the organization of ministries of health. Bull World Health
Organ 2000, 78:1005 –1014.
159. Frum D: Bloomberg ’s Visionary move against obesity. 2012. http://edition.cnn.
com/2012/06/04/opinion/frum-bloomberg-soda/index.html.
160. The Dutch Health Care Inspectorate [Inspectie voor de Gezondheidszorg]:
Law on public health [Wet publieke gezondheid]. 2012. http://www.igz.nl/
onderwerpen/handhavingsinstrumenten/wetten/overzicht-wetten/.
161. Connelly FM, Clandinin DJ: Stories of experience and narrative inquiry.
Educational Researcher 1990, 19:2–4.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-46
Cite this article as: Hendriks et al. :Proposing a conceptual framework
for integrated local public health policy, applied to childhood obesity -
the behavior change ball. Implementation Science 2013 8:46.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitHendriks et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:46 Page 16 of 16
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/46
