Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpb20
Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine
An Open Access Journal
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpb20
Evaluation of smoking cessation interventions
for veterans in HIV clinics in the United States: a
theory-informed concurrent mixed-method study
Seth Himelhoch, Veronica P. S. Njie-Carr, Amanda Peeples, Crystal Awuah,
Amanda Federline & Isabella Morton
To cite this article:  Seth Himelhoch, Veronica P. S. Njie-Carr, Amanda Peeples, Crystal
Awuah, Amanda Federline & Isabella Morton (2021) Evaluation of smoking cessation
interventions for veterans in HIV clinics in the United States: a theory-informed concurrent
mixed-method study, Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine, 9:1, 724-740, DOI:
10.1080/21642850.2021.1967159
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/21642850.2021.1967159
This work was authored as part of the
Contributor's official duties as an Employee
of the United States Government and
is therefore a work of the United States
Government. In accordance with 17 U.S.C.
105, no copyright protection is available for
such works under U.S. Law.
Published online: 30 Aug 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1492
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

Evaluation of smoking cessation interventions for veterans in
HIV clinics in the United States: a theory-informed concurrentmixed-method study
Seth Himelhocha, Veronica P. S. Njie-Carrb, Amanda Peeplesc,d,
Crystal Awuahb, Amanda Federlinedand Isabella Mortone
aCollege of Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, USA;bSchool of Nursing, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA;cEducation and Clinical Center, U.S. Department of Veterans A ﬀairs Maryland
Health Care System, Mental Illness Research, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;dU.S. Department of Veterans A ﬀairs
Maryland Health Care System, Education and Academic A ﬀairs, Baltimore, Maryland, USA;eUCLA Semel
Institute, Los Angeles, California, USA
ABSTRACT
Objective: Although veterans living with HIV infection are
burdened with smoking-related morbidities, few studies have
explored theory-informed, evidence-based smoking cessationinterventions in the Veterans A ﬀairs (VA) Health System.
Method: In this concurrent mixed-method study, we sought to
better understand factors in ﬂuencing the adoption of existing
evidence-based smoking cessation interventions (reminders,
telephone quit lines, pharmacological) for veterans in VA HIVclinics. We explored the alignment of the revised Promoting
Action on Research Implementation in Health Services Framework
(i-PARIHS) with study results.Results: Nineteen clinicians working at eight HIV clinics in the VA
System participated in the study. Seven themes were identi ﬁed with
relative quantitative and qualitative data convergence of clinicians ’
perceptions of the importance of integrating evidence-based
smoking cessation interventions for veterans with HIV infection.Conclusion: Identi ﬁed themes underscore the need for clinicians to
provide smoking cessation training, supportive care, and motivate
veterans living with HIV infection to quit smoking. Integrating
smoking cessation programs into HIV treatment plans in the veteran
patient population is critical. Dedicated time to fully implementthese e ﬀorts will maximize smoking cessation intervention e ﬀorts
and will yield successful utilization and subsequent patient
compliance. Importantly, combination strategies will ensure
cessation program impact and sustainability.
Trial registration: Netherlands National Trial Register identi ﬁer:
ntr050. .ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 24 March 2021
Accepted 6 August 2021
KEYWORDS
Barriers; enablers; HIV
infection; i-PARIHS
framework; Veterans A ﬀairs
This work was authored as part of the Contributor ’soﬃcial duties as an Employee of the United States Government and is therefore a work
of the United States Government. In accordance with 17 U.S.C. 105, no copyright protection is available for such works under U.S. Law. Thisis an Open Access article that has been identi ﬁed as being free of known restrictions under copyright law, including all related and neigh-
boring rights ( https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/mark/1.0/ ). You can copy, modify, distribute and perform the work, even for
commercial purposes, all without asking permission.CONTACT Veronica P. S. Njie-Carr vnjiecarr@umaryland.edu 655 West Lombard Street, Suite 475C, Baltimore, MD
21201, USAHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND BEHAVIORAL MEDICINE
2021, VOL. 9, NO. 1, 724 –740
https://doi.org/10.1080/21642850.2021.1967159
Introduction
Smoking exacerbates the HIV disease trajectory with grave consequences including HIV
treatment non-adherence (Harris, 2010; Manuel, Lum, Hengl, & Sorensen, 2013;
Moscou-Jackson, Commodore-Mensah, Farley, & DiGiacomo, 2014). About 14% of
the adult population in the United States (U.S.) smoke and are at risk for the morbid-ities associated with smoking (Cornelius, Wang, Jamal, Loretan, & Ne ﬀ,2020). People
living with HIV (PLWH) smoke three times the rate of the general population (Bean,
Richey, Williams, Wahlquist, & Kilby, 2016; Ledgerwood & Yskes, 2016 ) and are
associated with AIDS and non-AIDS related morbidity and mortality (Brandt et al.,
2017 ; Kariuki et al., 2015 ; Monnig et al., 2016 ; Sigel, Makinson, & Thaler, 2017;
West, 2017).
Smoking is particularly prevalent in the veteran population due to factors that
incentivize tobacco use such as low tobacco costs on military bases, dedicated time
for smoke breaks, social smoking, and smoking as an idle activity or stress reliever
(Reisen et al., 2011; Wilson et al., 2017 ). Ignacio et al. ( 2018 ) found that the Veterans
Aﬀairs (VA) Health Administration reported high rates of tobacco use in individuals
with psychiatric and substance use disorders. Veterans are also disproportionately
aﬀected due to traumatic experiences (Center for Disease Control and Prevention
[CDC], 2018a ; Ignacio et al., 2018 ). A study conducted from 2010 –2015 found that
three in ten veterans use tobacco products with the highest type of tobacco use
being cigarettes (CDC, 2018a ).
The risk of current smoking is increased in veterans living with HIV (VLWH) (Wilson
et al., 2017). The Veterans Aging Cohort Study of 2892 patients with HIV from multiple
VA infectious disease clinics revealed that as many as 64% of VLWH smoked (Wilsonet al., 2017). Another study that investigated tobacco use in male veterans with HIV in
the Washington, D.C. area found a prevalence of smoking to be as high as two thirds
in comparison to one- ﬁfth of the general population (Reisen et al., 2011); and higher
morbidity and mortality in veterans who smoked compared to veterans who did not(Crothers et al., 2009 ). Although there is knowledge of increased morbidity associated
with smoking VLWH, studies suggest that smoking cessation (SC) is less emphasized
due to elevated risk of mortality from HIV (Shirley, Kaner, & Glesby, 2013 ). SC e ﬀorts
for PLWH in community treatment centers is minimal and brief, with healthcare
workers facing barriers such as lack of time, patient resistance, lack of provider self-
eﬃcacy to provide SC interventions, and lack of pharmacotherapy (Ledgerwood &
Yskes, 2016 ).
Evidence-based SC interventions are not routinely o ﬀered to PLWH (Kariuki et al.,
2015 ; Tesoriero, Gieryic, Carrascal, & Lavigne, 2010 ). There is critical need to evaluate
SC interventions o ﬀered to PLWH to inform the utilization of best practices (Pacek &
Crum,
2015). An available SC resource o ﬀered to VLWH who smoke falls under the
National Smoking and Tobacco Use Cessation Program. Smoking cessation medications
are made available to smokers interested in quitting at the VA (Ignacio et al., 2018 ). The
VA Health System has been the vanguard in implementing accessible and evidence-based
approaches to evaluate and o ﬀer SC interventions for veterans who smoke. The VA pro-
vides reminders to screen for SC within the electronic medical record, o ﬀers free access toHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 725
telephone-based quit lines, and provides access to evidence-based pharmacological treat-
ment approaches for SC.
Recognizing the high prevalence of smoking among VLWH and the challenges of SC
intervention uptake throughout the VA, the aim of this study was to evaluate factorsinﬂuencing the utilization of evidence-based SC treatment interventions at eight HIV
treatment sites within the VA System using a mixed-method approach. The Revised Pro-
moting Action on Research Implementation in Health Services Framework (i-PARIHS)(Harvey & Kitson, 2016 ) was used to deductively frame the evaluation of SC interven-
tions among VLWH. The constructs include Innovation, Recipients, Context, and Facili-
tation and propagates understanding of the implementation and utilization of evidence-
based practices in health systems (Kitson et al., 2008 ; Stetler, Damschroder, Helfrich, &
Hagedorn, 2011 ). The Framework suggests that implementation and utilization is suc-
cessful when the evidence is robust, the system of care is receptive to change, and thechange process is appropriately facilitated.
Methods
Design
We utilized a mixed method design triangulating quantitative and qualitative methods
(Bryman, 2006 ; Fetters & Freshwater, 2015) and the i-PARIHS Framework as conceptual
background. The mixed method approach increased our understanding of factors
inﬂuencing the implementation of evidence-based SC interventions for VLWH from
the perspectives of clinicians. Our mixed method approach enabled a comprehensive
view of the mechanisms in ﬂuencing the utilization of evidence-based SC interventions
within the VA setting.
Setting
Veteran A ﬀairs HIV clinics were purposively selected to provide a geographically diverse
group that exists throughout the U.S. Sampling emphasis was placed on recruiting sites in
the Southeastern area of the U.S. as this is the area with the fastest HIV infection rate
(CDC, 2018b ).
Sample size determination
From a methodological perspective, prior research suggests that unique qualitative
themes can be identi ﬁed with 12 -15 participant individual interviews to achieve satur-
ation (Guest, Bunce, & Johnson, 2006). Data triangulation process used in the study
also enhanced saturation (Fusch & Ness, 2015 ).
Participants and data collection process
Study procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the investigators ’
institution. Criteria for study eligibility included: (1) HIV clinicians operationalized asinfectious disease fellows, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants licensed to726 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
provide direct care to VLWH at VA HIV clinics. We broadly operationalized ‘HIV clin-
icians ’in order to maximize our sample size and include a variety of viewpoints. Partici-
pants were excluded if they: (1) self-reported hearing loss that prevent phone interviews;(2) were not licensed to provide clinical care to VLWH; or (3) had status of a trainee (forexample, intern or resident).
Data collection process
After contacting Veterans A ﬀairs HIV clinic directors at eight sites and providing the
opportunity to review the study aims and research protocol, directors at all eight sites
agreed to participate. As part of the recruitment process, directors were instructed by
the research team to convey to potential participants (clinicians) that participation inthe study was completely voluntary. Clinic directors gave clinicians permission to par-ticipate during regular working hours, and all clinicians working in participating sites
were invited to participate. If an HIV clinician expressed interest in the study, the
clinic director provided their name and contact information (VA email address andphone number) to the research team. The research assistant then contacted potential
participants by email to provide more information and con ﬁrm their interest. After
agreeing to participate, clinicians were scheduled for a phone interview and weresent study-related materials by email. Study-related materials included data collection
forms (demographic form and survey instrument [described below]) and a VA form
for obtaining permission to audio record the interviews. If no response was receivedfrom the participants after three days, the research assistant followed up with a
phone call. Clinicians were given ample time to review the study materials and ask
questions. Clinicians were asked to return the signed VA Consent Form by the dayof the interview. During the interview, the research team reviewed the demographicform and survey, the Organizational Readiness to Change Assessment (ORCA), (Hel-
frich, Li, Sharp, & Sales, 2009) over the phone and recorded the clinician ’s responses.
After surveys were completed, the qualitative interview would begin. Survey data andrecordings were labeled with a unique ID codes and only the study team had access to
the key linking data to codes. Audio recordings were transcribed verbatim by a VA-
approved transcription agency.
Quantitative measures
Demographic assessment
The demographic assessment form included questions about demographic character-
istics such as age, gender, education, length of employment in the VA, and smokinghistory.
Organizational readiness to change assessment (ORCA)
The ORCA was developed speci ﬁcally for the VA setting, and is based on the i-PARIHS
Framework. The tool was used to assess organizational readiness to adapt evidence-based
interventions and organizational capacity to successfully implement tobacco cessationinterventions. ORCA is a ﬁve-point Likert scale (e.g. 1 [ strongly disagree ]t o5[ strongly
agree ]). It has three sub-scales with a total of 75 items that correspond to the key elementsHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 727
of the i-PARIHS Framework and scores are summed for each subscale. The ORCA is
well-validated and internal consistency for the sub-scales are: Evidence ( α= 0.85),
Context ( α= 0.74), and Facilitation ( α= 0.9) (Helfrich et al., 2009 ). It is important to
note that because the ORCA was developed prior to recent updates to the PARIHS Fra-mework, ORCA does not separately identify Recipients as conceptualized in the revised i-
PARIHS, but incorporates Recipients in the constructs of Evidence (as patient prefer-
ences) and Context (staﬀculture). This di ﬀerence was addressed by examining and reor-
ganizing study results along the constructs of the new i-PARIHS Framework in all phases
of the analysis ( Table 1 ).
Qualitative interviews
Qualitative interviews were conducted using a semi-structured interview guide developed
by the research team. The purpose of the in-depth interviews was to elicit clinician percep-tions and experiences with the utilization of SC interventions within the context of HIV
care in the VA. Topics included types of SC available at the providers ’clinic, the perceived
need for o ﬀering SC to VLWH, and providers ’thoughts and experiences with patient
readiness and follow-up on SC referrals. Questions were designed to re ﬂect the key
elements of the i-PARIHS Framework and integrating the ORCA questions ( Table 1 ).Table 1. i-PARIHS constructs with examples of corresponding qualitative and ORCA questions.
i-PARIHS
Construct Example Qualitative Questions Example ORCA Items
Innovation Please describe your perceptions of the need, or
lack of need, for smoking cessation among HIVpatients at your clinic.
Tell me about what kind of background,
experience, and training you might have withsmoking cessation treatments?How does smoking cessation impact clinical
processes?Integrated smoking cessation treatment will
improve health outcomes for patients with HIV.Integrated smoking cessation treatment for
patients with HIV is supported by RCTs or other
scienti ﬁc evidence from VA.
Recipients What do you hear patients say about the desire or
need for smoking cessation?How successful do you think smoking cessation
is among your patients?
Could you please describe the extent to which,if at all, smoking cessation treatment occurswith HIV patients at your clinic?Integrated smoking cessation treatment for
patients with HIV are supported by clinicalexperience with VA patients.
Integrated smoking cessation treatment for
patients with HIV take into consideration theneeds and preferences of VA patients.Staﬀmembers in your organization are receptive
to change in clinical processes.
Context What are the challenges of o ﬀering smoking
cessation at your clinic?What are the things regarding smoking
cessation that are working well at your clinic?
What roles do departmental of facilityleadership play in providing smoking cessationservices?Senior leadership/clinical management in your
organization solicit opinions of clinical sta ﬀ
regarding decision about patient care.
Senior leadership/clinical management in your
organization promote communication amongclinical services and units.In general in my organization, when there is
agreement that change needs to happen we have
the necessary support in forms of training/facilities/sta ﬃng.
Facilitation Have you heard of or received a copy of the HIV
Provider Smoking Cessation Handbook ?
What types of facilitation –in terms of focus
and delivery strategies- would you prefer toreceive?
What are your colleagues ’facilitation needs?Senior leadership/clinical management will provide
clear goals for improvement in patient care.
The implementation team members have sta ﬀ
support and other resources required for theproject.728 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
For example, questions were asked related to participants ’perceptions of the current and
anticipated barriers and enablers to utilizing SC treatments among VLWH, personal
experiences when o ﬀering SC care, and observations of SC initiatives conducted by
other clinicians. Questions were also asked about how shifting the structural and organiz-ational landscape of VA healthcare might facilitate or impede SC e ﬀorts.
Qualitative data collection process
The semi-structured interviews were conducted by one of two senior members of the
research team (the ﬁrst author and another doctoral-level researcher). In preparation
for the interviews, all members of the research team jointly reviewed the principles of
qualitative interviewing and ran through several mock interviews (Seidman, 2006).
The interviews lasted approximately 30-45 min. Participants were interviewed duringregular working hours and thus were not compensated in accordance with federal
employment guidelines.
Data analyses
Quantitative data analysis
Data from the ORCA were analyzed using descriptive statistics with means and standard
deviations presented in Table 2 . The answers to the questions complemented the quali-
tative analysis.
Qualitative data analysis
Transcripts were proofread and de-identi ﬁed prior to analysis. Preliminary qualitative
analysis was conducted by three of the authors (SH, AP, and AF) and a doctorally-
Table 2. Organizational readiness to change assessment data.
Scale Subscale Mean (SD)
Evidence/Innovation 4.24 (0.36)
Research 4.41 (0.41)Patient Preferences 4.06 (0.48)
Clinical Experiences 3.91 (0.63)
Context 3.81 (0.56)
StaﬀCulture 4.13 (0.58)
Opinion Leaders 4.07 (0.44)
Measurement 3.94 (0.68)
Leadership Culture 3.82 (0.84)Leadership 3.72 (0.96)Resources 3.11 (0.93)
Facilitation 3.85 (0.45)
Project Evaluation 4.19 (0.50)Implementation Plan 4.00 (0.56)Project Communication 3.92 (0.59)
Clinical Champion 3.89 (0.42)
Project Progress Tracking 3.86 (0.45)Leaders ’Practices 3.80 (0.51)
Leadership Implementation Roles 3.76 (0.65)
Project Resources 3.73 (0.65)
Implementation Team Roles 3.67 (0.67)
Note: ORCA answer responses range from 1=strongly disagree to 5=strongly agree.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 729
prepared VHA researcher. SH and AF were trained by AP and the VHA researcher who
have extensive experience in conducting qualitative research and analysis. Weekly meet-
ings provided the platform to discuss and reconcile divergent results. A summary tablewith emergent themes was created utilizing standard word processing software. Thesummary table allowed for the reduction of data without the loss of key information
(Miles & Huberman, 1994 ), and included key domain headings and de ﬁnitions as a code-
book to provide structure. For example, the domains of ‘Need’and‘Patient Experience ’
were selected deductively using the i-PARIHS Framework; other domains were identi ﬁed
inductively to address emerging themes (the list of domains can be made available upon
request). During the development of the summary table, we independently andthoroughly summarized each transcript and then met as a group to compare completed
summaries for similarities and di ﬀerences. Di ﬀerences were reconciled through an itera-
tive process. This process was repeated to check for consensus and to ﬁnalize the
summary table. Individual researchers ’transcript summaries were then reconciled into
a‘master ’summary for each transcript. After the ﬁrst seven transcripts were summarized,
the data from the master summary templates were copied onto a Microsoft Excel matrixto begin analysis and identi ﬁcation of common themes within and across participants
and sites (Miles & Huberman, 1994). We met regularly to ensure ongoing consensus
and discussion of the domains, themes, and ﬁndings allowing the research team to
update the interview guide, the summary domains, and the analysis process to re ﬂect
new questions and themes as they were identi ﬁed from the data. Additionally, VNC
who has experience with qualitative and mixed method designs was invited by SH to par-
ticipate and she contributed to identifying the themes in the ﬁnal stages of the analysis
process.
Mixed method integration
Findings from the quantitative and qualitative were integrated through the process of tri-
angulation. Triangulation is ‘the checking of inferences drawn from one set of data
sources by collecting data from others, ’especially in cases of ‘data produced by
diﬀerent data collection techniques ’(Hammersley & Atkinson, 2007, p. 183).
Results
Description of demographic characteristics
Nineteen clinicians working at eight di ﬀerent facilities across the VA system in the
United States participated in the study and ranged from one to three clinicians per facil-
ity. Ten (N = 19) were from facilities representing the Northeast and Mid-Atlantic
regions, while the remainder (9/19) were from facilities representing the South andSouth West regions. Participants worked at the VA for an average of 12 years (range 5
months –34 years), and the vast majority were physicians (14/19). Most clinicians
self-identi ﬁed as being white (15/19), non-Hispanic (17/19), men (10/19), and never
smoked (19/19). See Table 3 for a complete list of participants ’demographic
characteristics.730 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
Themes
Seven themes emerged from the interviews. While we used i-PARIHS to start our analysis
(deductively identifying constructs for the summary table), we also took an inductive
approach to analyze interviews data guided by qualitative method. Therefore, ourresults are organized and presented according to the seven themes that best ﬁt the
data and not necessarily what suited i-PARIHS. Themes and the relationships with the
i-PARIHS Framework constructs of Innovation, Recipients, Context, and Facilitation
are discussed to introduce the themes .Clinician status and years as a VA employee
are provided in parentheses following exemplar quotes.
Innovation construct
The initial construct of Evidence which includes the adoption of sources of evidence to
meet the unique priority needs of participants in speci ﬁc contexts was extended in the
i-PARIHS Framework. The notion of blending sources of evidence, clinical practice,
patients ’needs, and preferences are integral to this construct. The Innovation construct
was added to capture the application of SC evidence and its adoption or ‘uptake ’by
VLWH (i.e. usability), particularly in the domains of clinicians ’perceived need for SC
interventions for VLWH that smoked. We also included clinicians ’view of patients ’
experiences and adoption of SC interventions.
Theme 1: perceived usability for smoking cessation as a priority need
Clinicians emphasized that SC is essential for VLWH and viewed as a priority need as the
use of ARV increases life expectancy. Additionally, VLWH are at increased risk for age-and tobacco-related illnesses compared to non-HIV populations.Table 3. Respondent demographic characteristics ( N= 19)
Variable N %
Gender
Male 10 52.6Female 9 47.5Clinical job position*
Nurse Practitioner 3 15.8
Physician /PA 16 84.2Education Level≤Graduate degree* 5 26.4
Medical degree 14 73.7
RaceWhite 15 78.9POC* 4 21.1
Ethnicity
Hispanic 2 10.5Non-Hispanic 17 89.5Smoking Status
Not a smoker 19 100
Age (M ± SD) 47.3 ± 13.5Length of time employed by VA (M ± SD) 12.8 ± 12.2
POC = people of color; VA = veteran ’saﬀairs.
*Categories combined due to small values and to maintain participant con ﬁdentiality.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 731
When you think of all the major aging type issues and cancers that HIV patients will develop
at earlier ages or will develop at higher rates than the non-HIV patients, you put tobacco inthere as a causative agent in almost all of them. I mean I don ’t know that we put as much
emphasis on it as we should, but I think under medication I think probably one of the top
most helpful things we could do is to do a good job at smoking cessation. (Physician ’s Assist-
ant, 25yrs)
Clinicians reported that SC was one of many shifting priorities for patients. If a patient
has other urgent HIV care needs such as substance abuse, or other medical conditions,then SC would be relegated to a lower priority. One notable exception was if patients pre-sented with smoking-related conditions, such as respiratory infection or other cardiovas-
cular risk factors, then SC is prioritized.
But if I ’m seeing somebody in urgent care who ’s got an upper respiratory infection for the
fourth or ﬁfth time this year then I ’ll take the lead and push a little harder and say, you know,
we’ve got a bunch of [SC] options that we can o ﬀer you …. (Nurse Practitioner, 20 yrs)
Theme 2: knowledge, attitudes, and con ﬁdence to implement SC
Knowledge sources, existing values, and the degree to which these are integrated in the
practice contexts are also important aspects of the Innovation construct. Cliniciansexpressed varying levels of comfort when discussing and treating VLWH. Clinicians new
to the VA reported feeling uncomfortable, often citing lack of knowledge of best practices,
training, and the availability of SC alternatives to nicotine replacement therapy (NRT).Some clinicians had no formal training in SC and identi ﬁed it as a critical training need.
They were generally more comfortable with NRT compared to other SC interventions.
I don’t think I ’ve had any specialized training in smoking cessation treatment. I think what I
…learned about di ﬀerent approaches is just what I learned in residency …and really
doesn ’t involve much other than nicotine patches and gum. (Infectious Disease MD, 5
months)
Recipient construct
TheRecipient construct captures patient motivation to accept support for the implemen-
tation and utilization of SC interventions. Motivations are informed by patient views,beliefs, and experiences with established practices, which drive the successful implemen-tation of SC interventions.
Theme 3: perceptions of patient experiences and active engagement
Clinicians reported that patients ’readiness and motivation to quit was important and
unless patients express interest in quitting, it will be ine ﬀective and may a ﬀect the clin-
ician-patient encounter.
Involving the patient is always the ﬁrst step …If there is no patient buy-in …I don ’t think
there is much of a chance for being successful. (Infectious Disease MD, 11yrs)
Clinicians also reported the need for easy-to-implement strategies to prevent losing
motivation if patients expressed interest. Patients were perceived as unwilling to732 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
attend extra appointments at the VA to continue with the SC treatment. Time, support,
and resources are important characteristics of the Recipient construct as captured in the
words from a nurse practitioner.
Most of the time, because of time commitments, patients usually just –opt [out] …because
they sometimes have concerns about time commitments. (Nurse Practitioner, 8 months)
Clinicians report that VLWH acknowledge that they should quit, but not all are ready to
do so, with many patients reducing smoking rather than quitting. Competing priorities(e.g. social problems, other addictions) are perceived to in ﬂuence patients ’motivation for
SC. Several clinicians noted that smoking may be seen as a ‘crutch ’to help patients deal
with problems in their everyday lives.
…have too many other things in their lives …A lot of them are homeless. A lot of them
don’t have enough money to live on. And they worry about day-to-day things that keep
them alive. And smoking is like a crutch they got to lean on when things get tough. (Infec-tious Disease MD, 34 yrs)
Context construct
The Context construct conceptualizes readiness for SC implementation and utilization
that focuses on inner (immediate local setting) and outer (policy, social, political, andregulation infrastructure) contexts at the micro, meso, and macro levels of function.Context was evaluated as barriers and enablers to providing SC interventions, which
are related to resources, culture, leadership evaluation, interest, attitudes toward learning
for change, and learning environment.
Theme 4: barriers to SC utilization
Clinicians identi ﬁed the lack of SC education, knowledge, and skills as major barriers to
utilizing SC e ﬀorts. Also, structural barriers such as limited time, space to conduct SC
training, and grant funding to facilitate utilization were identi ﬁed.
One of the challenges about approaching patients with smoking cessation, is that you really
need time to ﬁnish the whole conversation with them. If you ’re just going to say to them
how’d you like to quit smoking, that ’s not going to mean very much to them. So in order
to have the entire conversation that ’s meaningful, I think it takes time. Probably takes
about 10, 15 min to get the entire thought process through, what the risks are, and thatthey’re much better o ﬀnot smoking. …if you got eight patients in clinic that morning,
or 12 patients that morning, that you ’re really willing to spend 15 min, or the whole conver-
sation, rather than just do the perfunctory thing and say well, are you interested in stopping
smoking? No? Okay. And just move on. You ’ve got other patients waiting. …(Infectious
Disease MD, 34 yrs)
There is also variability in individual clinicians ’SC eﬀorts; a lack of clear and consistent
communication between clinicians about SC e ﬀorts prevents coordinated e ﬀorts. While
some clinicians had SC resources on-site (e.g. social workers), other clinicians identi ﬁed a
lack of coordinated SC e ﬀorts as a barrier.
I think a barrier for the patient …is that our pharmacy wants all of these [SC prescriptions]
to be mailed out and I think sometimes we may miss an opportunity for somebody who ’s…HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 733
on the fence about smoking cessation, or they ’re willing to quit today because their bronchi-
tis is so bad they can ’t breathe anyway and so they ’ve already quit for 48 h. …, by the time
they actually get whatever they ’re going to use they ’re feeling better and they ’re back to
smoking. (Nurse Practitioner, 20 yrs)
Without on-site integration of SC e ﬀorts, it is di ﬃcult for clinicians to evaluate the
success of SC among patients.
Theme 5: enablers to SC utilization
Important contextual enablers to SC utilization were identi ﬁed. Clinicians with on-site
pharmacy services noted that the ease of prescribing NRT and/or other pharmaceuticals
is helpful. Having on-site classes and social workers to review SC options with patientsare enablers to SC.
We’re fortunate enough to have two social workers with us in [the]clinic, so they ’re right
here…actively integrated into patient care. Certainly if she gets backed up on a particular
day she may sort of touch base with the person and then setup a separate appointment …
(Nurse Practitioner, 20 yrs).
Many clinicians reported taking a person-centered supportive approach. Not all patients
would respond to the same type of treatment; thus, substantiating the importance of per-
sonalized care for SC.
Facilitation construct
TheFacilitation construct includes the facilitator role (individuals and teams) and facili-
tation process (strategies and techniques) that enable and activate the utilization of SC.
Facilitation role or facilitators are individuals or teams that ensure that strategies aremodiﬁed for maximum uptake or adoption in tandem with the necessary collaborative
engagement of institutional networks.
Theme 6: need for resource utilization
To evaluate the facilitation process or strategies, we were particularly interested in if clin-
icians received or used the HIV Provider Smoking Cessation Handbook and the accom-
panying patient workbook, My Smoking Cessation Workbook: A Resource for Patients,
and/or were referring patients who smoke to VA-sponsored telephone-based quitlines. Some clinicians reported that they neither used nor heard of the VA quit lines
or Handbook and some had heard of but did not use them.
I think I had heard that. I haven ’t speci ﬁcally referred any patients to that or didn ’t necess-
arily know the details of the program. (Infectious Disease MD, 22 months)
Theme 7: need for more facilitators and facilitation
Clinicians largely agreed that on-site SC champions would be e ﬀective. They could miti-
gate barriers to SC utilization. Greater involvement and engagement of clinicians andstaﬀand a formalized peer support for SC were also suggested to improve SC e ﬀorts.734 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
Well, I think it could be sort of a team e ﬀort. It might be a combination of providers such as
the nurse practitioners and …partnerships between nurse practitioners and some of the
mental health sta ﬀ. (Nurse Practitioner, 8 months)
Clinicians suggested that it would be important to reinforce current policies and pro-
cedures that prohibit smoking in VA facilities. Additionally, they reported that these
eﬀorts would spotlight the importance of SC and a high priority for VLWH.
Quantitative results
On the entire ORCA scale, clinicians agreed to strongly agreed ( M= 4.5, SD= 0.4) that
SC interventions will improve health outcomes for VLWH who smoke. Clinicians also
agreed to strongly agreed ( M= 4.2, SD= 0.4) to the utilization of SC interventions
within the HIV clinical setting. With respect to the ORCA sub-category of Context,on average clinicians neither agreed nor disagreed ( M= 3.8, SD= 0.6) that the VA sup-
ports the utilization of SC in HIV clinical settings. Additional concern was noted regard-
ing having enough sta ﬀ, training, space and funding to utilize smoking cessation
interventions ( M= 3.1, SD= 0.9). Related to the ORCA sub-category of Facilitation, on
average participants neither agreed nor disagreed to agreed ( M= 3.8, SD= 0.4) that
there was adequate facilitation to utilize SC interventions.
Data triangulation
Results from the quantitative ORCA results converged with the qualitative interviews.Speciﬁcally, clinicians felt a high degree of con ﬁdence in the construct of Evidence,
with the highest mean score and items based on the utilization of best evidence, clinician
expertize, and patient preferences and values. In the qualitative interviews, participants
were particularly concerned about the level of priority placed in SC. Additionally,there was limited training available to some clinicians to address the knowledge gaps
related to the SC for VLWH (innovation). Facilitation was the second highest mean
score focused on the characteristics of the team members and process strategies and tech-niques. Participants reported an enormous need for resources, trained clinicians, andsystem-wide strategies for successful implementation and utilization. Lastly, Context
included items on resources, barriers, and enablers. Table 2 has detailed descriptions
of the items included in the ORCA. In the qualitative interviews, context was addressedin the form of barriers and enablers in terms of time to dedicate to SC program-related
discussions, private rooms to hold the discussions, and the availability of multidisciplin-
ary teams, and the need for champions or navigators to attend to the multilevel factors ofSC for VLWH. E ﬀorts to triangulate the results from the two methodological approaches
converged; thus, enhancing validation and clari ﬁcation of the SC interventions for veter-
ans with HIV infection (Bazeley, 2009 ; Bryman, 2006 ).
Discussion
The aim of the study was to evaluate factors in ﬂuencing the utilization of SC interven-
tions to adopt evidence-based interventions using a mixed method approach to triangu-lateﬁndings and understand the mechanisms associated with the i-PARIHS FrameworkHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 735
(i.e.Innovation, Recipient, Context, Facilitation ) in the implementation and utilization of
evidence-based SC interventions in VA clinic settings. Overall, clinicians agreed that
there was strong evidence that smoking was related to greater morbidity and mortalityamong VLWH. Clinicians were more interested in utilizing SC interventions, whilespecialists thought SC was an issue better managed by the veteran ’s primary care
team. In a systematic review of SC in adults with substance abuse treatment or recovery
conducted by Thurgood, McNeill, Clark-Carter, and Brose ( 2016), investigators found
that behavioral support by clinic sta ﬀin conjunction with NRT was integral in facilitating
SC (Thurgood et al., 2016 ). They reported that the individualized counseling prompted
SC maintenance and prevented relapse. Another study on SC in women living with HIVfound that a con ﬁguration of behavioral support, motivational interviewing, combined
with NRT as opposed to prescribed advice alone decreased the mean cigarettes
smoked per day (Manuel et al., 2013 ). Video group SC interventions for PLWH have
promise, particularly for those who prefer virtual participation for convenience. Design-
ing a population-speci ﬁc, client-centered intervention would be more successful because
this population has several in ﬂuencers beyond physiological desire such as the social and
emotional contexts (Ignacio et al., 2018 ; Shiltz, Paniagua, & Hastings, 2011; Thurgood
et al., 2016 ; Wilson et al., 2017). Studies substantiate the importance of a combination
of strategies and the dedicated time and e ﬀort required for successful implementation
of SC intervention programs (West, 2017).
HIV clinicians identi ﬁed several important contextual themes related to the i-PARIHS
Framework that substantially limited the reach and impact of the utilization of SC e ﬀorts
at the VA. Lack of education and experience using evidence-based SC interventions wasnoted as a consistent barrier. Compounding the lack of training was frustration with the
perceived lack of interest of patients in quitting, and poor outcomes attributed to current
SC interventions. Most reported a strong interest in receiving additional training toenhance knowledge and competence to utilize SC interventions e ﬀectively. These impor-
tant perspectives provide the opportunity for targeted interventions to improve the
implementation and adoption of SC programs for VLWH.
Contextual barriers to providing SC treatment were also identi ﬁed. There were mixed
views regarding electronic record reminders for SC screening. Some clinicians used the
reminders to begin the discussion on SC while others ignored them. Clinicians reported
that a lack of dedicated time and space limited the utilization of on-site SC interventions.Utilization was also hampered by the variable access to facility-level SC treatment to which
they could refer their patients. Among clinicians reporting the ability to refer to facility-
level SC treatment, most expressed concerns that the times and locations of these interven-tions were not readily accessible to working veterans or those traveling long distances. The
vast majority of clinicians were unaware that the VA supported free, telephone-based SC
quit lines. Our study was consistent with other studies (Bean et al., 2016; Cunningham,
Kaboli, Ono, & Vander Weg, 2011;L e d g e r w o o d&Y s k e s , 2016; Thurgood et al., 2016).
The literature on VLWH is sparse. However; compared to a study conducted by Ledger-
wood and Yskes ( 2016), SC among PLWH was emphasized but there were barriers to
proper utilization of evidence-based interventions. These barriers included patient resist-ance, insu ﬃcient counseling time, and lack of provider con ﬁdence. Another area of suc-
cessful utilization was the length of time invested in SC. A longitudinal study conducted
by Burns, Rothman, Fu, Lindgren, and Joseph ( 2014) found that individuals who received736 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
long-term follow-up care were more likely to remain abstinent than those who were o ﬀered
routine care suggesting the need for rigorous and longitudinal studies for SC among
VLWH.
Facilitation (as a role and process) was perceived by most of the clinicians as an aspira-
tional ideal, but with important opportunities. Clinicians largely agreed that on-site SC
champions would be an e ﬀective strategy to overcome contextual barriers to SC but
funding for such positions is limited. Only one of the eight sites reported havingaccess to an integrated SC service within the HIV clinic setting led by a social worker
who provided evaluations, behavioral treatment interventions, and served as a facilitator
at the site. Clinicians a ﬃliated with the site were satis ﬁed with this service delivery
framework.
Implications
Harris ( 2010 ) identi ﬁed that a majority of the literature in existence on this subject matter
is geared towards discovery research rather than delivery or implementation research(Harris, 2010 ). This indicates opportunities to investigate best approaches in the utiliz-
ation of SC among VLWH given the paucity of empirical evidence. Gaps can be
addressed through the collaboration of researchers and practitioners and the continuedreporting of challenges faced by practitioners for iteration of programs (Harris, 2010 ).
Furthermore, given the numerous barriers identi ﬁed in our study, e ﬀorts to strengthen
the enablers such as funding for SC facilitators and clinician champions are warranted.
Integrating smoking cessation programs into HIV treatment plans in the veteran
patient population is critical. A coordinated e ﬀort between the VA central o ﬃce and
VA facilities may be needed to ensure the training of clinicians and sta ﬀon the practical
use of evidence-based approaches for SC among VLWH. Given the morbidity and mor-tality associated with smoking among VLWH, it may be important to evaluate whether
facility level ﬁnancial incentives directed speci ﬁcally at implementing SC interventions
may be needed. It is clear that dedicated time and e ﬀort will maximize this e ﬀort and
yield successful utilization and subsequently facilitate patient compliance. Importantly,
a combination of strategies such as motivational interviewing, NRT, and informational
sessions for sustainability have shown success. In addition, implementation of long-term interventions may be more useful than occasional one-time interventionsbecause long-term follow up care reinforces abstinence and provides a safeguard
against relapse.
Study limitations
The study results may only be generalizable to patients with similar demographic charac-
teristics. Additionally, there was limited statistical power with the aim to test hypotheses
and not to ﬁnd signi ﬁcance.
Conclusions
Smoking is prevalent in the veteran population due to factors that incentivize tobacco use
such as lower cost of tobacco products on military bases, dedicated time for smoke breaksHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 737
at work, and smoking as an idle activity or stress reliever. Even though there is ample
evidence supporting the association of increased morbidity with smoking among
VLWH, SC is less emphasized. The convergence of the ORCA results and identi ﬁed
themes underscore the need for clinicians working in VA HIV clinics to provide SCtraining and supportive care to motivate VLWH to stop smoking. Working toward
ways to better facilitate the implementation and utilization of SC programs for VLWH
would be an important next step for the VA system of care.
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
This material is based upon work supported by the Department of Veterans A ﬀairs, Veterans
Health Administration, O ﬃce of Research and Development. The views expressed in this article
are those of the authors and do not necessarily re ﬂect the position or policy of the Department
of Veterans A ﬀairs or the United States government.
Data availability statement
Data for the results in the manuscript can be available from the ﬁrst author upon request.
ORCID
Seth Himelhoch http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2183-0340
Veronica P. S. Njie-Carr http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7197-502X
Amanda Peeples http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4471-7957
References
Bazeley, P. ( 2009). Integrating data analyses in mixed methods research (Editorial) .Journal of
Mixed Methods Research 3 (3), 203–207. doi: 10.1177/1558689809334443
Bean, M. C., Richey, L. E., Williams, K., Wahlquist, A. E., & Kilby, J. M. ( 2016 ). Tobacco use pat-
terns in a southern US HIV clinic. Southern Medical Journal ,109(5), 305 –308. doi: 10.14423/
SMJ.0000000000000460
Brandt, C. P., Bakhshaie, J., Jardin, C., Lemaire, C., Kau ﬀman, B. Y., Sharp, C., & Zvolensky, L. J.
(2017). The moderating e ﬀect of smoking status on the relation between anxiety sensitivity,
sexual compulsivity, and suicidality among people with HIV/AIDS. International Journal of
Behavioral Medicine ,24(1), 92 –100. doi: 10.1007/s12529-016-9568-5
Bryman, A. ( 2006 ). Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: How is it done? Qualitative
Research ,6(1), 97 –113. doi: 10.1177/1468794106058877
Burns, R., Rothman, A., Fu, S., Lindgren, B., & Joseph, A. ( 2014). The relation between social
support and smoking cessation: Revisiting an established measure to improve prediction.Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,47(3), 369 –375. doi: 10.1007/s12160-013-9558-7
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. ( 2018a ).About three in ten US Veterans use tobacco
products [Press Release]. Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2018/p0111-
tobacco-use-veterans.html
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. ( 2018b ).HIV in the United States by region, 2017.
Retrieved from https://www.cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/overview/geographicdistribution.html738 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
Cornelius, M. E., Wang, T. W., Jamal, A., Loretan, C. G., & Ne ﬀ,L .J .( 2020 ). Tobacco product use
among adults —United States, 2019. MMWR Morbidity Mortality Weekly Report ,69, 1736 –
1742. doi: 10.15585/mmwr.mm6946a4externalicon
Crothers, K., Goulet, J. L., Rodriguez-Barradas, M. C., Gilbert, C. L., Oursler, K. A., Goetz, M. B.,
Crystal, S., Leaf, D. A., Butt, A. A., Braithwaite, R. S., Peck, R., & Justice, A. C. ( 2009 ). Impact of
cigarette smoking on mortality in HIV-positive and HIV-negative veterans. AIDS Education
and Prevention ,21(3), 40 –53. doi: 10.1521/aeap.2009.21.3_supp.40
Cunningham, C. L., Kaboli, P., Ono, S., & Vander Weg, M. W. ( 2011 ). A qualitative evaluation of
knowledge of and attitudes toward VA smoking cessation services. Journal of Smoking
Cessation ,6(2), 152 –158. doi: 10.1375/jsc.6.2.152
Fetters, M. D., & Freshwater, D. ( 2015). Publishing a methodological mixed methods research
article. Journal of Mixed Methods Research ,9(3), 203 –213. doi: 10.1177/1558689815594687
Fusch, P. I., & Ness, L. R. ( 2015 ). Are we there yet? Data saturation in qualitative research. The
Qualitative Report ,20(9), 1408 –1416. Retrieved from http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/QR20/9/
fusch1.pdf
Guest, G., Bunce, A., & Johnson, L. ( 2006). How many interviews are enough? An experiment with
data saturation and variability. Field Methods ,18(1), 59 –82. doi: 10.1177/1525822X05279903
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. ( 2007 ).Ethnography: Principles in practice . London: Routledge.
Harris, J. K. ( 2010). Connecting discovery and delivery: The need for more evidence on e ﬀective
smoking cessation strategies for people living with HIV/AIDS. American Journal of Public
Health ,100(7), 1245 –1249. doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2009.172460
Harvey, G., & Kitson, A. ( 2016 ). PARIHS revisited: From heuristic to integrated framework for the
successful implementation of knowledge into practice. Implementation Science ,11, 33. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13012-016-0398-2
Helfrich, C. D., Li, Y. F., Sharp, N. D., & Sales, A. E. ( 2009 ). Organizational readiness to change
assessment (ORCA): Development of an instrument based on the promoting action on researchin health services (I-PARIHS) framework. Implementation Science ,4, 38. doi: 10.1186/1748-
5908-4-38
Ignacio, R., Barnett, P., Kim, H., Geraci, M., Essenmacher, C., Hall, S., …Duﬀy, S. ( 2018). Trends
and patient characteristics associated with tobacco pharmacotherapy dispensed in the VeteransHealth Administration. Nicotine & Tobacco Research ,20(10), 1173 –1181. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntx229
Kariuki, W., Manuel, J. I., Kariuki, N., Tuchman, E., O ’Neal, J., & Lalanne, G. A. ( 2015 ). HIV and
smoking: Associated risks and prevention strategies. HIV/AIDS ,8,1 7–36.
Kitson, A. L., Rycroft-Malone, J., Harvey, G., McCormack, B., Seers, K., & Titchen, A. ( 2008 ).
Evaluating the successful implementation of evidence into practice using the I-PARIHSFramework: Theoretical and practical challenges. Implementation Science ,3, 1. doi: 10.1186/
1748-5908-3-1
Ledgerwood, D. M., & Yskes, R. ( 2016 ). Smoking cessation for people living with HIV/AIDS: A
literature review and synthesis. Nicotine & Tobacco Research ,18(12), 2177 –2184. doi: 10.1093/
ntr/ntw126
Manuel, J. K., Lum, P. J., Hengl, N. S., & Sorensen, J. L. ( 2013 ). Smoking cessation interventions
with female smokers living with HIV/AIDS: A randomized pilot study of motivational inter-viewing. AIDS Care ,25(7), 820 –827. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2012.733331
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. ( 1994 ).Qualitative data analysis: An expanded sourcebook (2nd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Monnig, M. A., Kahler, C. W., Lee, H., Pantalone, D., Mayer, K., Cohen, R., & Monti, P. ( 2016).
Eﬀects of smoking and alcohol use on neurocognitive functioning in heavy drinking, HIV-posi-
tive men who have sex with men. AIDS Care ,28(3), 300 –305. doi: 10.1080/09540121.2015.1093595
Moscou-Jackson, G., Commodore-Mensah, Y., Farley, J., & DiGiacomo, M. ( 2014 ). Smoking ces-
sation interventions in people living with HIV infection: A systematic review. Journal of the
Association of Nurses in AIDS Care ,25(1), 32
–45. doi: 10.1016/j.jana.2013.04.005
Pacek, L. R., & Crum, R. M. ( 2015 ). A review of the literature concerning HIV and cigarette
smoking: Morbidity and mortality, associations with individual- and social-level characteristics,HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY AND B EHAVIORAL MEDICINE 739
and smoking cessation e ﬀorts. Addiction, Research, & Theory ,23(1), 10 –23. doi: 10.3109/
16066359.2014.920013
Reisen, C., Bianchi, F., Cohen-Blair, H., Liappis, A., Poppen, P., Zea, M. C., …Labriola, A. ( 2011).
Present and past in ﬂuences on current smoking among HIV-positive male veterans. Nicotine &
Tobacco Research ,13(8), 638 –645. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntr050
Seidman, I. ( 2006 ).Interviewing as qualitative research . Chicago: Teachers College Press.
Shiltz, D., Paniagua, A., & Hastings, J. E. ( 2011 ). A retrospective comparison of varenicline mono-
therapy versus the combination of varenicline and bupropion or bupropion and nicotinepatches in a VA tobacco cessation clinic. Journal of Smoking Cessation ,6(1), 65 –73. doi: 10.
1375/jsc.6.1.65
Shirley, D. K., Kaner, R. J., & Glesby, M. J. ( 2013 ). Eﬀects of smoking on non-AIDS-related mor-
bidity in HIV-infected patients. Clinical Infectious Diseases ,57(2), 275 –282. doi: 10.1093/cid/
cit207
Sigel, K., Makinson, A., & Thaler, J. ( 2017 ). Lung cancer in persons with HIV. Current Opinions in
HIV AIDS ,12(1), 31 –38. doi: 10.1097/COH.0000000000000326
Stetler, C., Damschroder, L., Helfrich, C., & Hagedorn, H. ( 2011). A guide for applying a revised
version of the i-PARIHS Framework for implementation. Implementation Science ,6, 99.doi:10.
1186/1748-5908-6-99
Tesoriero, J. M., Gieryic, S. M., Carrascal, A., & Lavigne, H. E. ( 2010 ). Smoking among HIV posi-
tive New Yorkers: Prevalence, frequency, and opportunities for cessation. AIDS Behavior ,14(4),
824–835. doi:10.1007/s10461-008-9449-2
Thurgood, A., McNeill, A., Clark-Carter, D., & Brose, L. ( 2016). A systematic review of smoking
cessation interventions for adults in substance abuse treatment or recovery. Nicotine & Tobacco
Research ,18(5), 993 –
1001. doi: 10.1093/ntr/ntv127
West, R. ( 2017 ). Tobacco smoking: Health impact, prevalence, correlates and interventions.
Psychology and Health ,32(8), 1018 –1036. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2017.1325890
Wilson, S., Pacek, L., Dennis, P., Bastian, L., Beckham, J., & Calhoun, P. ( 2017 ). Veterans living
with HIV: A high-risk group for cigarette smoking. AIDS and Behavior ,21(7), 1950 –1955.
doi:10.1007/s10461-017-1717-6740 S. HIMELHOCH ET AL.
