Person-Specific Dose-Finding for a Digital Messaging 
Intervention to Promote Physical Activity
Sarah Hojjatinia1, Sahar Hojjatinia1, Constantino M. Lagoa1, Deborah Brunke-Reese2, 
David E. Conroy2,3
1School of Electrical Engineering & Computer Science, The Pennsylvania State University
2Department of Kinesiology, The Pennsylvania State University
3Department of Preventive Medicine, Northwestern University
Abstract
OBJECTIVE: Digital messaging is an established method for promoting physical activity. 
Systematic approaches for dose-finding have not been widely used in behavioral intervention 
development. We apply system identification tools from control systems engineering to estimate 
dynamical models and inform decision rules for digital messaging intervention to promote 
physical activity.
METHODS: Insufficiently-active emerging and young adults (n = 45) wore an activity monitor 
that recorded minute-level step counts and heart rate, and received 0–6 digital messages daily on 
their smartphone for six months. Messages were drawn from three content libraries (move more, 
sit less, inspirational quotes). Location recordings via location services in the user’s smartphone 
were used to lookup weather indices at the time and place of message delivery. Following 
system identification, responses to each message type were simulated under different conditions. 
Response features were extracted to summarize dynamic processes.
RESULTS: A generic model based on composite data was conservative and did not capture 
the heterogeneous responses evident in person-specific models. No messages were uniformly 
ineffective but responses to specific message content in different contexts varied between people. 
Exterior temperature at the time of message receipt moderated the size of some message effects.
CONCLUSIONS: A generic model of message effects on physical activity can provide the initial 
evidence for context-sensitive decision rules in a just-in-time adaptive intervention, but it is likely 
to be error-prone and inefficient. As individual data accumulates, person-specific models can 
be estimated to optimize treatment and evolve as people are exposed to new environments and 
accumulate new experiences.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to David Conroy, 266 Rec Hall, The Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, PA 16802. conroy@psu.edu.
Sarah Hojjatinia is now at Advanced Safety & User Experience, Aptiv.
Sarah and Sahar Hojjatinia contributed to formal analysis, software, writing portions of the original draft, and reviewing and editing 
the paper. Constantino Lagoa contributed to conceptualization, formal analysis, funding acquisition, methodology, supervision, and 
reviewing and editing the paper. Deborah Brunke-Reese contributed to investigation, project administration, and reviewing and editing 
the paper. David Conroy contributed to conceptualization, funding acquisition, methodology, project administration, supervision, 
writing a portion of the original draft, and reviewing and editing the paper.
Trial registration: Clinicaltrials.gov  Identifier NCT03907683 .
HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Psychol . 2021 August ; 40(8): 502–512. doi:10.1037/hea0001117.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Keywords
mobile health; precision medicine; prevention; social ecology; patient-specific computational 
modeling
Physical activity is a widely recommended behavior across the lifespan because it reduces 
risk for chronic diseases and improves well-being but only 1 in 3 adults achieves the 
recommended level of physical activity ( Bennie et al., 2019 ). Over 95% of emerging 
and young adults have smartphones that afford new possibilities for promoting physical 
activity during the transition into adulthood ( Pew Research Center, 2019 ). Digital messages 
via text messages or notifications have become a popular mode for motivating physical 
activity ( Smith et al., 2020 ). The timing and frequency of messages varies considerably 
between interventions but dosing parameters have typically been constant for all participants 
receiving the intervention. We recently proposed that the optimal dosing of digital messages 
for physical activity promotion may be person-specific ( Conroy et al., 2020 ). In this paper, 
we apply methods from control systems engineering to address the challenge of person­
specific dose-finding for a digital messaging intervention.
Physical Activity Promotion
Physical activity has been called the “best buy” in public health because of its multi­
system benefits for health ( Powell et al., 2011 ). The World Health Organization and the 
United States Department of Health and Human Services have issued guidelines for health­
enhancing physical activity ( Bull et al., 2020 ; U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services, 2018 ). Both guidelines recommend accumulating at least 150 minutes/week 
of moderate-intensity or 75 minutes/week of vigorous-intensity physical activity (or an 
equivalent combination). Yet most American adults, including emerging and young adults, 
fail to achieve this recommended level of aerobic physical activity ( Bennie et al., 2019 ).
Inactivity during the transition into adulthood is a particular concern because physical 
inactivity tracks across the lifespan. Although the biggest decreases occur in adolescence 
and midlife, emerging and young adulthood represent a time of increased independence and 
identity exploration that can have lasting effects on physical activity in adulthood ( Nelson 
et al., 2008 ). Promoting physical activity during this period, when contextual cues are 
frequently disrupted, can promote long-term health outcomes. For example, the CARDIA 
study found that young adults who engage in regular physical activity are more likely to 
have a low risk profile (i.e., no cardiovascular events) 20 years later ( Liu et al., 2012 ).
Unfortunately, this segment of the population often eludes the reach of traditional health 
care interventions because they feel healthy, have not developed chronic conditions that 
would require care, and do not see physicians regularly for preventive care ( Dietz, 2017 ; 
Monaghan, 2014 ). One way to reach them may be through the digital environment. Over 
95% of emerging and young adults in the United States have smartphones ( Pew Research 
Center, 2019 ). Wearable activity trackers, smartphone applications, and text messages 
produce small-to-moderate effects on physical activity ( Armanasco et al., 2017 ; Laranjo 
et al., 2020 ; Smith et al., 2020 ).Hojjatinia et al. Page 2
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Consumer-grade activity trackers have popularized the step count as a physical activity index 
over the intensity-specific activity durations noted in guidelines. Bassett argued that steps 
are “intuitive and readily interpretable to the layperson…measured easily and accurately…
[and] objective” ( Bassett et al., 2017 , p. 1306). Although a consensus evidence-based goal 
for daily step counts has not been established for adults ( Tudor-Locke et al., 2011 ), there 
is clear evidence that daily step counts are linearly and inversely associated with risk for 
mortality and cardiovascular disease ( Hall et al., 2020 ; Kraus et al., 2019 ; Saint-Maurice et 
al., 2020 ). Yet little is known about the optimal dosing of digital messaging interventions for 
increasing step counts. For example, it is unclear if messages to “move more” or “sit less” 
are more effective, or if the same dose should be delivered on weekends and weekdays.
Dose-Finding Methods in Early Stage Intervention Development
Behavioral interventions are complex and development can proceed more efficiently using 
a phased approach. The Obesity-Related Behavioral Intervention Trials framework was 
modeled on the drug development pipeline ( Czajkowski et al., 2015 ). Dose-finding is a key 
task during early-phase intervention development. With a digital messaging intervention, 
delivering too few messages can compromise behavior change but delivering too many 
messages may be disruptive and threaten user engagement. Although dose-finding methods 
are well-established and widely used in drug development, dose-finding has not been 
approached as systematically in developing behavioral interventions, and particularly digital 
health interventions ( McVay et al., 2019 ; Towner et al., 2020 ; V oils et al., 2014 ).
Given the low risk for harm from digital messages that promote physical activity, our focus 
was on identifying the minimally-effective dose. Dosing is often described in terms of the 
duration, frequency, and amount of treatment ( V oils et al., 2012 ). For digital messaging, 
doses can represent the number of messages sent, the content of those messages, and the 
timing of the messages. An optimized digital messaging dose will deliver the right content 
at the right time in the fewest number of messages needed to achieve a behavioral goal. 
Determining how to tailor message content and timing to achieve this goal is challenging 
because behavior is multiply determined and the contexts in which behavior unfolds are 
dynamic. Computational modeling of dynamic systems via system identification can be 
useful for determining how to tailor message content and timing ( Conroy et al., 2020 ).
We have previously shown that it is possible to apply system identification tools from 
control systems engineering to develop person-specific dynamic models of behavioral 
responses to digital messages ( Ashour et al., 2016 ; Conroy et al., 2019 ). In this context, 
the focus is on both how the dynamics of behavior unfold in the presence or absence 
of micro-interventions, and how that knowledge can inform the selection and timing of 
interventions to attain behavioral goals ( Albertos & Mareels, 2010 ). Continuous streams 
of physical activity data can be modeled as a function of recent behavior and message 
content, and model coefficients can be used to simulate expected changes in future behavior 
if different types of messages were delivered following recent behavior. When dynamics 
differ during clearly-defined periods – such as on weekends versus weekdays – piecewise 
dynamic models can be estimated to characterize complementary behavioral systems.Hojjatinia et al. Page 3
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
In this paper, we extend this approach in two important ways. First, we simulate responses 
to different message types under different conditions and, for the first time, extract features 
of those responses to compare person-specific models with a generic model based on 
composite data from the sample as a whole. Second, we enrich the dynamic model of 
physical activity by using momentary weather conditions as inputs to improve predictions 
of behavioral responses. Adults frequently describe poor weather as a barrier to exercise 
(Salmon et al., 2003 ). Our recent scoping review indicated that device-measured physical 
activity has an inverted-U shaped association with temperature and a negative association 
with precipitation ( Turrisi et al., 2021 ). We hypothesized that the effects of digital messages 
would vary as a function of momentary temperature and precipitation indices, with the 
greatest effects observed during dry conditions with moderate temperatures.
The Present Study
The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans assert that, “adults should move more and 
sit less throughout the day [and] some physical activity is better than none” ( Piercy et 
al., 2018 , p. 2025). Translating that recommendation into action is an ongoing challenge. 
Technology provides a means of promoting physical activity during the transition into 
adulthood but little is known about the optimal dosing of a messaging-based intervention. 
In this study, we applied system identification tools to determine the optimal dosing for 
a context-specific, just-in-time digital messaging intervention to promote physical activity. 
For six months, insufficiently-active emerging and young adults wore a consumer-grade 
smartwatch and received randomly-assigned intervention messages (Random AIM) in this 
trial. The number, timing and content of messages varied randomly. Location data at 
the time of message receipt and acknowledgement was used to lookup current weather 
conditions to enrich model predictions. The primary purpose of this study was to identify 
and characterize the heterogeneity of dynamical models of physical activity responses to 
digital messages. A second purpose was to determine whether person-specific dosing of 
digital messages may be warranted by comparing the performance to a generic dynamical 
model based on composite data from the entire sample to person-specific dynamical 
models. A third purpose was to extend and enrich the model by accounting for varying 
environmental conditions at the time of message receipt.
Methods
Participants
Emerging and young adults were recruited using fliers and online advertisements from 
April 2019 to July 2020. Eligible participants were 18–29 years of age, ambulatory, free 
of functional activity limitations, free of visual impairment that would interfere with 
smartphone use, had verbal and written fluency in English and were capable of giving 
informed consent. Participants also needed to own a smartphone using the iOS (v10 or 
later) or Android (v7 or later) operating system. Participants were excluded if self-reported 
physical activity levels were greater than 90 minutes of moderate or higher physical activity 
per week, if unable to be physically active or with medical contraindications for physical 
activity, if pregnant or had a prior diagnosis of cancer, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, or Hojjatinia et al. Page 4
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
metabolic disorder. Participants completed a telephone screening with a researcher followed 
by a 1-week ambulatory monitoring period wearing an Actigraph wGT3X-BT activity 
monitor. Participants were excluded if the device recorded the equivalent of more than 150 
total minutes of moderate-intensity or greater physical activity based on five or more days 
with 10+ hours of monitor wear time during the 1-week monitoring period.
The World Health Organization declared the COVID-19 pandemic on March 11, 2020. 
Stay-at-home orders associated with the pandemic reduced physical activity levels ( Pépin 
et al., 2020 ; Tison et al., 2020 ). To prevent confounding of message and pandemic effects, 
analyses were restricted to participants who completed 6 months of data collection prior to 
the pandemic declaration (n = 45).
Measures
During the first laboratory visit, participants self-reported demographic characteristics 
including age, ethnicity, race, sex, educational attainment, employment status and 
occupation. Research staff measured height and weight in duplicate using a wall-mounted 
stadiometer and a digital scale upon removal of the participant’s shoes.
Actigraph wGT3XP-BT activity monitors were worn at the waist over the midline of 
the dominant thigh to assess the duration of moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical 
activity during the secondary screening process (without providing behavioral feedback that 
could elicit reactivity). This device and placement are widely-used as a gold-standard for 
ambulatory physical activity assessment. Established cutpoints were used to classify minutes 
as moderate (1952–5724 counts/min) and vigorous (>5724 counts/min) physical activity 
(Freedson et al., 1998 ).
The Fitbit Versa/Versa Lite smartwatch, a widely-available consumer-grade monitor that 
could be used to scale an intervention later in development, was worn on the non-dominant 
wrist to track step counts during the 6-month intervention period. This device recorded 
minute-level step counts and heart rate (in 5-minute moving averages). Fitbit devices have 
demonstrated accuracy for step counting that is comparable to research-grade Actigraph 
monitors and suitable for use in adults without mobility limitations ( Feehan et al., 2018 ; 
Imboden et al., 2018 ).
Protocol
The protocol and compensation schedule are summarized in Figure S1 (available online). 
All procedures were approved by the Institutional Review Board at The Pennsylvania State 
University (Study#00009455).
Screening & Lab Visit #1.— Prospective participants provided verbal consent (day 0) and 
completed a telephone screening interview to determine eligibility. Provisionally-eligible 
participants were scheduled for a laboratory visit to complete screening. During that first lab 
visit (day 1), the researcher described the study and participants provided written informed 
consent. The researcher provided the participant with an Actigraph wGT3X-BT activity 
monitor and instructions to wear it at their waist on an elastic waistband over the midline of 
their dominant leg for the next week during waking hours for a minimum of 10 hours/day, Hojjatinia et al. Page 5
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
and to remove it when bathing or swimming. The researcher provided a paper wear log and 
asked participants to record times when they placed the device each morning, removed the 
device in the evening, and removed or re-placed the device during the day.
Lab visit #2.— During the second lab visit (day 9), the researcher collected the activity 
monitor and wear log, downloaded data, reviewed non-wear classifications from the 
“Troiano 2007” algorithm in the ActiLife v.6.13.4 software and determined eligibility. 
The researcher described the second phase of the study and participants provided written 
informed consent to enroll. The researcher then assisted the participant with installing 
the Random AIM (custom-designed for this study) and Fitbit mobile applications on her 
or his smartphone, registered the participant on the backend system, confirmed Random 
AIM functionality with a test message, provided the participant with a Fitbit Versa/Versa 
Lite smartwatch, and assisted participants in authorizing Fitbit to share their data via 
Fitabase. The researcher asked the participant to identify separate Do Not Disturb periods 
for weekdays and weekends (<14 hours to provide at least a 10-hour messaging window), 
and informed participant that these times could be changed at any point by contacting the 
researcher.
Intervention period.— For the next 6 months, the Random AIM app delivered 0–6 
messages/day as notifications via the operating system. The number, timing, and content of 
messages were determined at random each night with the constraints that no message could 
be delivered within 15 min of the previous message or within the Do Not Disturb window 
for that day. Messages were drawn from three content libraries: move more (108 messages), 
sit less (108 messages), and inspirational quotes (54 messages). Half of the messages 
were accompanied by a stock photography image corresponding to message content (i.e., 
physical activity for move more messages, standing for sit less images, scenic landscapes 
for inspirational quotes). Notifications with each message were available for viewing and 
acknowledgement for 30 minutes after which time they disappeared and were recorded as 
received but not acknowledged.
For each message, the backend system recorded the time that the message was sent 
from the server to the mobile app, delivered and displayed on the participant’s device, 
and acknowledged by the participant (three separate timestamps). The mobile app used 
location services within the operating system to record latitude and longitude coordinates 
each time a message was received and acknowledged. The timestamped location data at 
display and acknowledgement were used to lookup location-specific momentary weather 
indices via the AccuWeather Current Conditions application programming interface 
(AccuWeather, n.d. ). Weather indices are recorded approximately hourly but are rarely 
available immediately so, 3 hours after message receipt, the server looked up location­
specific weather indices using the Historical Current Conditions (past 6 hours) application 
programming interface. Recorded weather indices included temperature (Fahrenheit), dew 
point (Fahrenheit), relative humidity (%), Real Feel temperature (Fahrenheit), apparent 
temperature (Fahrenheit), wind chill temperature (Fahrenheit), wet bulb temperature 
(Fahrenheit), wind direction (degrees), wind direction (English), wind speed (miles/hour), 
wind gust speed (miles/hour), UV index, cloud cover, past-hour precipitation (liquid Hojjatinia et al. Page 6
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
equivalent, inches), and past 3-hour precipitation (liquid equivalent, inches). The researcher 
monitored the backend dashboards for both the Random AIM and Fitbit apps daily to detect 
compliance problems. A researcher contacted participants via telephone or email anytime 
3 consecutive days without Fitbit heart rate data (suggesting device non-wear) or 3 days 
without acknowledging Random AIM messages were observed.
Lab visit #3.— The researcher scheduled a final lab visit (day 190) after participants 
completed the 6-month intervention period to assist the participant with removing the study 
apps.
Data Analysis
Pre-processing.— Four data tables were combined to model physical activity dynamics 
following messages: person-level availability for messages, minute-level physical activity, 
minute-level heart rate, and messages with weather indices at the time of delivery and 
receipt. Timestamps were harmonized in four source data files and the files were merged. 
Physical activity and heart rate data were truncated to the period from one hour before the 
messaging availability window started to one hour after it ended to ensure sufficient activity 
data when messages were sent early or late in the day. Activity data was separated for 
weekdays and weekends, and classified as missing if zero steps were recorded and heart rate 
data was not available for a minute epoch. Minutes with missing heart rate and zero step 
counts were not included in the model (weekends: 15% missing, weekdays: 13% missing). 
Messages scheduled and sent from the server that were not received and displayed on a 
participant’s device were excluded from the model because future intervention decisions will 
be made without regard to whether a message will be read or not. The available and valid 
minute-level physical activity data was aggregated into sums for each 15-minute epochs. 
Message and weather data were merged with those 15-minute epochs. Days were treated as 
independent and message effects on physical activity were not modeled across days.
System identification.— The Python programming language was used to implement the 
system identification algorithms used to identify the models ( Van Rossum & Drake, 2009 ). 
Building on prior work, physical activity was modeled as a switched system with separate 
models to reflect the different amount and patterns of physical activity on weekdays and 
weekends ( Conroy et al., 2019 ; Phatak et al., 2018 ). The first stage of analyses was based on 
a linear regression model with multiple variables and noise of the form
ykd=a0+∑
i= 15
aiykd−id+∑
j= 13
   ∑
i= 05
bijujkd−id+εkd (1)
where y(kd) is the system output at time kd which is the step counts for the 15-minute 
epoch at time kd, uj(kd − id) are the inputs for the three message types (move more, sit 
less, inspirational quotes) at time kd − id(0 [message not sent], 1 [message sent]), d is 
the sampling time, ε(kd) is noise at time kd, and a0,ai,bij are the unknown coefficients 
of the model. To manage the trade-off between model complexity and size of the model 
error, model order was constrained to 5 which means that the last five epochs were used in 
predicting the next epoch.Hojjatinia et al. Page 7
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
In the second stage of analyses, a linear parameter-varying (LPV) system was modeled. 
This LPV model described how the dynamics of behavioral responses to messages varied 
as a function of time-varying parameters. In this study, the time-varying parameter was 
temperature. The LPV model with noise is of the form
ykd=a0pkd+∑
i= 15
aipkdykd−id+∑
j= 13
   ∑
i= 05
bijpkdujkd−id
+εkd(2)
where a0(p(kd)),ai(p(kd)),bij(p(kd)) are the unknown functions in the model that vary with 
parameter p at time kd. In this work, the parameter p is considered to be temperature 
and the coefficients a0(p(kd)),ai(p(kd)),bij(p(kd)) are considered to be quadratic function of 
parameter p at time kd. A quadratic function was selected based on evidence that physical 
activity has an inverted-U relation with temperature ( Turrisi et al., 2021 ).
Models from both stages of analyses were used to simulate responses to each message 
type. Impulse responses represent expected step count changes during each 15-minute epoch 
following receipt of each message type (compared to expected step counts had a message 
not been received). Cumulative step responses represent the total expected effect of each 
type of individual message. Error bounds were estimated for each response curve to indicate 
whether effects exceeded the threshold of noise in the model. Full details on estimation and 
optimization methods are provided in a Supplemental File.
Seven features were extracted to describe person-specific impulse response and cumulative 
response curves ( Conroy et al., 2019 ). Initial delay  describes the delay between message 
delivery and the first effects (non-zero impulse response) of the message. Peak magnitude 
describes the absolute value of the maximum change in step count during any individual 
epoch following message receipt. Peak delay  describes the latency between message receipt 
and achieving peak response magnitude. These first peak features indicate how quickly 
messages have their largest instantaneous effect on behavior. Steady state  describes the 
expected overall effect (step count change) of a single message and was defined as the 
value when the cumulative response curve becomes stable. Rise time  describes the time 
required for physical activity responses to progress from 10% to 90% of the expected 
total response (steady state). Settling time  describes the duration between message receipt 
and cumulative responses achieving ±5% of their steady state. Steady state, rise time, and 
settling time indicate the overall effect of a single message, how quickly that effect emerges, 
and how much time is required to achieve most of the effect. Effective time  describes the 
duration that the expected overall effect of a single message is expected to exceed the 
cumulative threshold for noise (i.e., outside the error margin). This feature indicates the time 
that a message is expected to be actively influencing behavior in the face of progressively 
accumulating noise which adds uncertainty to long-term prediction of behavior change.
Results
Participant flow in the Random AIM trial is summarized in Figure S2. Approximately 45% 
of interested participants qualified and enrolled. The analytic sample (n = 45) was mostly Hojjatinia et al. Page 8
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
women (n=30 [67%]) who identified as White (n=29 [64%]) and not Hispanic or Latino 
(n=43 [96%]). The sample included participants who identified as Asian (n=10 [22%]), 
African-American (n=4 [9%]) and two or more races (n=2 [4%]). The mean age was 24.4 
years (SD = 3.1, range = 18 – 29) and participants’ highest level of education included no 
college education (15.9%), some college (22.7%), bachelor’s degree (34.1%), and graduate 
or professional degrees (27.3%).
Message Delivery
For the 45 participants in the analytic sample, a total of 24,123 messages were scheduled on 
the server (M = 3.05 messages/person/day, SD = 0.16). Of the scheduled messages, 96.0% 
were received and displayed on the mobile device with the total of 23,149 messages (M = 
2.92 messages/person/day, SD = 0.33), and 78.2% were acknowledged within 30 minutes of 
receipt (M = 2.38 messages/person/day, SD = 0.33). The mean latency of acknowledgements 
was 00:05:26 ( SD = 00:20:46). Received messages were distributed between “move more” 
(n=9093 [39%]), “sit less” (n=9363 [40%]), and “inspirational quotes” (n=4693 [20%]) 
message libraries. A total of 20,735 of the messages were available with corresponding 
data from the physical activity monitoring device, with a similar distribution of messages 
between “move more” (n=8161 [39%]), “sit less” (n=8351 [40%]), and “inspirational 
quotes” (n=4223 [20%]) in the received messages.
Most messages were delivered on weekdays (72%). The average Do Not Disturb window for 
participants spanned from 19:50 (95% CI = 16:30–23:10) to 09:20 (95% CI = 06:40–12:00) 
for weekdays and 20:30 (95% CI = 18:00–23:00) to 10:10 (95% CI = 08:00–12:20) for 
weekends. Acknowledged messages were distributed across the day so messages provided 
suitable coverage during waking hours outside the Do Not Disturb window (Figure S3, 
top row). Messages were distributed across all four seasons (Figure S3, bottom row). Due 
to the 6-month protocol duration, no participant was sampled in more than three seasons. 
Weather conditions at the time of message acknowledgement varied considerably. When 
weather indices at message acknowledgement were aggregated within person, the average 
temperature was 62°F (SD = 15, 95% CI = 31–92°F), and an average of 8.3% of the 
messages were received after measurable past-hour precipitation (SD = 2.2, 95% CI = 3.9–
12.7). Based on the limited proportion of messages sent during moments with measurable 
precipitation, precipitation models were excluded from this study.
System Identification
Do person-specific models match a generic model?— Two dynamical models of 
physical activity were estimated for each person based on their recent physical activity and 
the types of messages received on weekdays and weekends. The simulated impulse response 
and cumulative step response curves for two participants can be seen in Figures S4–S5.
For the participant in Figure S4, the steady state of physical activity responses differed 
from weekdays to weekends and as a function of the type of message sent. On weekdays, a 
single “sit less” message would be expected to lead to 87 more steps than if he or she did 
not receive the message, but “move more” and “quotes” messages were expected to reduce 
step counts. In contrast, on weekends, “sit less,” “move more” and “quotes” messages were Hojjatinia et al. Page 9
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
expected to lead to 133, 183, and 65 more steps, respectively, than if he or she did not 
receive the message.
For the participant in Figure S5, the steady state of physical activity responses also differed 
from weekdays to weekends and as a function of message type, but the pattern was different 
from the previous participant. On weekdays, “move more” and “sit less” messages were 
expected to lead to 136 and 132 more steps, respectively, than if he or she did not receive 
the message, but “quotes” messages were not expected to lead to non-trivial changes in step 
counts. On weekends, “quotes” messages were expected to lead to 166 more steps than if he 
or she did not receive the message, but neither “move more” nor “sit less” messages were 
expected to lead to non-trivial changes in step counts.
As a contrast to these person-specific models, a generic model was estimated using 
composite data from all eligible participants. Figure S6 presents the impulse (left panel) 
and cumulative response (right panel) curves for weekdays and weekends. On weekdays, “sit 
less” messages would be expected to lead to 25 more steps than if the message was not sent 
but neither “move more” nor “quotes” messages would be expected to change behavior. On 
weekends, “move more,” and “sit less” messages would be expected to lead to 46 and 53 
more steps, respectively, than if the message was not sent; however, “quotes” messages were 
not expected to lead to non-trivial changes in step counts.
Table 1 compares the features of the simulated responses to messages on weekdays and 
weekends based on the person-specific models and the generic model. The initial delay of 
responses was zero in all models so this feature excluded from the table. Three observations 
can be made based on the remaining features. First, response features in the person-specific 
models vary considerably. Peak response magnitudes in a single 15-minute epoch ranged 
from quite small (<10 step increase) to quite large (~200 step change). Some people are 
expected to have immediate peak responses to messages but others are expected to have 
quite delayed peak responses to messages (60 min). Cumulative responses to messages 
varied considerably with greater responses evident on weekends than weekdays. The 
“average” participant would be expected to increase their activity slightly following most 
messages but individual responses varied. Some participants would be expected to increase 
and others would be expected to decrease activity following messages. The latency of 
total effects was highly variable as indicated by the range of settling time, rise time, and 
effective time in the person-specific models. Second, no single message type appeared to 
be uniformly ineffective. As illustrated by Figures S4–S5, participants exhibited differential 
responsivity to messages both as a function of message content and whether that content 
was sent on a weekday or weekend. Third, the generic model features were within the 
range of features from the person-specific models for 81% (29/36) of the features. Peak 
magnitude estimates from the generic model were especially conservative, account for 5 of 
the 7 out-of-range values. In general, features from the generic model failed to address the 
heterogeneity of responses observed in the person-specific models.
Do person-specific responses to messages vary as a function of 
temperature?— Building on the heterogeneity of responses in our initial models, we 
sought to determine whether participants’ responses also varied under time-varying Hojjatinia et al. Page 10
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
environmental conditions (specifically, temperature at the time of message receipt). Figures 
S7–S8 present cumulative response curves from person-specific models of two participants’ 
weekday (top row) and weekend (bottom row) responses to three message types: “move 
more” (left panel), “sit less” (center panel) and “quotes” (right panel). These figures 
represent data for the same participants shown in Figures S4–S5, respectively. The range 
of temperatures plotted approximates the 95% confidence interval for observed temperatures 
during the 6-month study (36°F to 90°F for the participant enrolled from June to December; 
23°F to 72°F for the participant enrolled from August to February).
For the participant depicted in Figure S7 (cf. Figure S4), the effects of “move more” 
messages on weekdays were trivial regardless of temperature but, on weekends, “move 
more” message effects on physical activity increased monotonically with the temperature. 
On a hot weekend day (90°F), a single “move more” message would be expected to lead 
to more than 500 additional steps compared to what would be expected if the message 
was not sent. On a cold day (≤63°F), “move more” messages had little to no effect on 
this participant’s physical activity. “Sit less” messages exhibited a different pattern. On 
weekdays, “sit less” message effects increased monotonically with temperature. A single 
“sit less” message on a hot day (90°F) would be expected to lead to nearly 300 more 
steps compared to what would be expected if the message was not sent, but effects were 
progressively smaller as temperatures dropped. On weekends, “sit less” messages would be 
expected to have their greatest effect (>300 step increases) for this participant during more 
extreme – hot or cold – conditions.
For the participant depicted in Figure S8 (cf. Figure S5), message effects consistently 
varied as a function of message type, timing, and temperature. Of note, temperature-related 
differences in effects were not consistently monotonic. The largest effects of “move more” 
messages would be expected on weekdays with extreme temperatures (hot or cold). On 
weekdays, the largest effects of “sit less” and “quotes” messages would be expected at 
times with warmer temperatures. On weekends, “sit less” and “quotes” messages would 
be expected to have their greatest impact on physical activity at moderate temperatures. 
Surprisingly, “sit less” messages were expected to decrease physical activity by over 300 
steps at extremely cold moments on weekends.
Figure S9 (cf. Figure S6) presents the corresponding cumulative response curves from a 
generic model based on composite data from all participants. The generic model simulation 
implies smaller expected effects than the person-specific models, particularly on weekdays. 
Overall, the generic model implied that most message types sent under most conditions 
would have little to no effect on participants’ behavior. The effects of “sit less” message 
increased monotonically as a function of temperature on both weekdays and weekends, 
though the gradient of effects between message types was minimal. “Move more” messages 
had limited effects (~70 step increase) under most conditions with the exception being on 
hot (90°F) weekends. Surprisingly, the generic model implied that “quotes” messages on hot 
(90°F) days would lead to the largest expected effects of all message types on weekdays.Hojjatinia et al. Page 11
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Discussion
This research applied an engineering-inspired approach to determine the optimal dose for 
a digital messaging intervention. The approach extends the toolkit for dose-finding in 
behavioral intervention development ( McVay et al., 2019 ; Towner et al., 2020 ; V oils et 
al., 2014 ). It extended our prior work on dynamical modeling of physical activity and the 
effects of digital messages by obtaining a larger sample with a longer time series enriched 
by data on current weather conditions at the participant’s location when they receive a 
message ( Ashour et al., 2016 ; Conroy et al., 2019 ). A heterogeneous suite of person-specific 
models of individual participant’s responses to messages under different conditions were 
estimated along with a generic model based on composite data. The heterogeneity of 
responses was notable considering that the sample was delimited to a narrow age range of 
adults who were verified as insufficiently active. Rather than comparing model coefficients 
directly, expected behavioral responses were simulated for different types of messages under 
different conditions and key features of those responses were compared.
These dynamical models provide an evidence-based foundation for future work developing 
algorithms that are optimized to achieve behavior change goals with the smallest number of 
messages possible. Such algorithms represent the decisions rules that determine dosing in a 
just-in-time adaptive intervention as an optimization problem to be solved ( Nahum-Shani et 
al., 2018 ). By applying the computational model at prespecified decision points to simulate 
the expected responses to a variety of intervention options at that decision point, these 
algorithms can determine which message type would yield the greatest benefit under current 
conditions and, if the expected effect of a particular message type exceeds the threshold 
for a minimally-effective dose, trigger delivery of that message. These results provide new 
insights for dose-finding with digital messaging interventions to promote physical activity.
First, based on the heterogeneity of person-specific models, person-specific decision rules 
would appear to be superior to a generic decision rule for optimizing dosing. Features of 
impulse responses (peak magnitude, peak delay) in the generic model were consistently 
dampened in comparison to the mean of person-specific model features. Some features 
of the generic cumulative response curves (steady state, settling time) approximated the 
mean of person-specific cumulative response curves, but those estimates were fixed and 
failed to account for the tremendous variation in individual responses. This insensitivity 
of the generic model to individual differences could result in counter-productive treatment 
decisions if decision rules were based on that model. For example, the generic model 
implied a small but uniform positive effect of the “move more” and “sit less” messages. In 
contrast, the person-specific models revealed that approximately one in three participants 
would be expected to reduce their physical activity following one of these messages 
(see Supplementary Tables 1–2). Decision rules should be designed to accommodate this 
heterogeneity because group-level models are unlikely to generalize to individual-level 
processes ( Molenaar, 2004 ). If not, treatment decisions will be error-prone (selecting the 
wrong message content for delivery or sending messages at the wrong moments) and 
inefficient (sending too many messages to achieve a goal). These characteristics could 
jeopardize engagement and efficacy. Thus, findings point to the promise of using a small 
data paradigm for dose-finding ( Hekler et al., 2019 ).Hojjatinia et al. Page 12
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Second, although clearly sub-optimal, the generic model may still serve an important role 
in developing person-specific decision rules. Person-specific decision rules are developed 
based on person-specific models, and person-specific models can only be estimated when 
sufficient time-series data are available. Such time series are not immediately available when 
onboarding new users. One solution is to use the generic model of group-level physical 
activity dynamics to generate an initial decision rule (i.e., warm-start optimization). This 
initial generic decision rule could be replaced by progressively more refined person-specific 
decision rules as information accumulates for an individual. In this way, the intervention 
could be doubly adaptive – first adapting individual intervention decisions (i.e., whether to 
send a message and which message to send at each decision point) and second adapting 
individual decision rules as individual data accumulates and person-specific models are 
refined ( Conroy et al., 2020 ; Wongvibulsin et al., 2020 ).
Third, this study revealed that real-time temperatures provide a potentially-valuable tailoring 
variable for decision rules in a digital messaging tool for promoting physical activity. 
Temperature exhibits one of the clearest relations between the natural environment and 
device-measured physical activity but research has been observational and largely based 
on aggregated temperature data over time ( Turrisi et al., 2021 ). In behavioral intervention 
research, perceived weather has been identified as a barrier to physical activity ( Salmon 
et al., 2003 ). Temperatures also appear to function as an operating condition for physical 
activity interventions. Prior work supported this proposition at the daily time scale but used 
average daily temperature readings from a single (fixed) weather station in Chicago ( Welch 
et al., 2018 ). To accommodate human mobility patterns and weather dynamics from hour to 
hour, the present study extended that support using momentary GPS coordinates to lookup 
temperature indices recorded (or forecast) for the users’ actual location.
The dose-finding approach described here complements methods like the microrandomized 
trial which has been used to develop evidence-based decision rules for just-in-time adaptive 
interventions ( Klasnja et al., 2015 ). For example, the microrandomized trial design was 
used to develop a decision rule for the HeartSteps intervention ( Klasnja et al., 2018 ) and 
that approach is currently being extended using reinforcement learning techniques to adapt 
the decision rule as data accumulates ( Liao et al., 2020 ). System identification techniques 
used here can also be extended to design effective controllers (decision rules) that maximize 
the probability of achieving a desired goal while avoiding unsafe or ineffective operating 
regions.
One of the differentiating features of the system identification approach applied in this study 
involved its flexibility in accommodating smaller streams of data. Although reinforcement 
learning algorithms can be applied to adapt individual’s intervention in real time, they still 
face many challenges such as a need for accommodating noisy data, learning quickly, and 
accommodating model mis-specification ( Liao et al., 2020 ). On the other hand, system 
identification techniques can operate well in the presence of uncertainty and noisy datasets.
The expected effects reported here may seem modest in relation to normative daily step 
counts but keep in mind that these estimates are specific to individual digital messages 
and messaging interventions can send multiple messages each day. Additionally, behavioral Hojjatinia et al. Page 13
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
interventions for physical activity rarely involve single components and there may be 
additional effects from and interactions with other components (e.g., behavioral feedback, 
goal setting, social support; Conroy et al., 2014 ; Michie et al., 2009 ). Decisions about 
whether to include digital messaging components with person-specific decision rules can 
be informed by factorial experiments to optimize treatment packages for different target 
populations, goals, and resource constraints ( Collins, 2018 ).
Limitations
One limitation of this approach is that the person-specific models are opaque input-output 
models that do not reveal the mechanism(s) of behavior change. System identification has 
been applied to test social-cognitive models on slower (e.g., daily) time scales ( Freigoun et 
al., 2017 ; Hekler et al., 2013 ; Phatak et al., 2018 ; Riley et al., 2016 ). Few health behavior 
theories articulate dynamic processes clearly ( Riley et al., 2011 ) but obtaining intensive 
self-reports of motivational targets following message delivery may be disruptive. It may be 
possible to code messages within each content library based on their social-cognitive targets 
to identify which targeted messages affect behavior. Elaborating the number of message 
categories will reduce the data available to model the effects of each message and the risk 
of overfitting models will increase when model coefficients are based on smaller datasets. 
For that reason, caution is warranted in interpreting findings from contexts with fewer 
observations (e.g., extreme temperatures on weekend days); predicted effects under those 
conditions will be more uncertain.
Second, these models are based on a limited number of people’s historical responses to 
messages in a finite range of environmental conditions and locations. More representative 
samples with respect to people, environmental conditions, and geographic locations may 
reveal even more heterogeneous responses. If future contexts differ from those tested or 
assumptions of stationarity are violated, decisions based on these models may not be 
optimal. Nesselroade and Molennar (2010)  “conceive[d] of each person as a system of 
interacting dynamic processes, the unfolding of which produces an individual life trajectory 
in a high-dimensional psychological space” (p. 36). Assuming that people (i.e., systems) 
are constantly developing and adapting to environmental exposures and accumulated 
experiences (a core assumption of developmental system theory; Ford & Lerner, 1992 ), 
periodic model adaptations based on accumulating data may prove valuable in future work 
because people who learn can benefit from decision rules that learn and adapt with them.
These results provide an empirical strategy for iteratively-refining person-specific models. 
Such models can inform the design of person-specific decision rules but it is not 
yet clear whether person-specific decision rules are superior to simpler rules based on 
random selections or ad hoc decision parameters (with or without contextual information). 
Comparative effectiveness and cost-benefit studies are needed to answer those questions.
Conclusions
Digital messaging is an established tool for promoting physical activity ( Smith et al., 2020 ). 
Historically, dosing parameters have been determined by experts’ domain knowledge or 
user preferences. Efforts to amplify effects using a range of personalization strategies have Hojjatinia et al. Page 14
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
not been successful ( Armanasco et al., 2017 ). This study provided an approach for person­
specific dose-finding with a digital messaging intervention. This approach incorporates 
contextual data (recent behavior, day-of-week, weather conditions) and historical responses 
to different treatments (i.e., message types) to inform future decisions about treatment 
(i.e., whether or not to send a message and which message to send). Dose-finding is 
an important task for early-phase behavioral intervention development ( Czajkowski et al., 
2015 ). The challenge of dose-finding for complex behaviors that are multiply-determined 
and possibly regulated idiographically is substantial. Similar to the generic model estimated 
in this study, this study provides a starting point. The next steps in developing this method 
involve translating the generic model into a warm-start controller and developing methods 
for periodically updating that decision rule based on incoming data. That work is underway.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
The project described was supported by the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute of the National Institutes 
of Health (NIH) through Grant R01 HL142732 and the National Science Foundation (NSF) through Grant 
ECCS-1808266. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the 
official views of the NIH or the NSF. The authors declare that there are no competing interests. We thank 
West Arete for their creativity in developing the mobile app and backend system that enabled intervention 
delivery and data collection despite every effort of the iOS and Android operating systems to foil that effort. 
We thank AccuWeather for providing access to location-specific momentary weather indices via their application 
programming interfaces.
References
AccuWeather. (n.d.). AccuWeather APIs | Current Conditions API. Retrieved January 1, 2021, from 
https://developer.accuweather.com/accuweather-current-conditions-api/apis
Albertos P, & Mareels I (2010). Feedback and control for everyone. Springer-Verlag. 
10.1007/978-3-642-03446-6
Armanasco AA, Miller YD, Fjeldsoe BS, & Marshall AL (2017). Preventive health behavior change 
text message interventions: A meta-analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 52(3), 391–
402. 10.1016/j.amepre.2016.10.042 [PubMed: 28073656] 
Ashour M, Bekiroglu K, Yang CH, Lagoa C, Conroy D, Smyth J, & Lanza S (2016). On 
the mathematical modeling of the effect of treatment on human physical activity. 2016 IEEE 
Conference on Control Applications (CCA), 1084–1091. 10.1109/CCA.2016.7587951
Bassett DR, Toth LP, LaMunion SR, & Crouter SE (2017). Step counting: A review of measurement 
considerations and health-related applications. Sports Medicine (Auckland, N.Z.), 47(7), 1303–
1315. 10.1007/s40279-016-0663-1
Bennie JA, De Cocker K, Teychenne MJ, Brown WJ, & Biddle SJH (2019). The epidemiology of 
aerobic physical activity and muscle-strengthening activity guideline adherence among 383,928 
U.S. adults. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 16(1), 34. 10.1186/
s12966-019-0797-2
Bull FC, Al-Ansari SS, Biddle S, Borodulin K, Buman MP, Cardon G, Carty C, Chaput J-P, Chastin 
S, Chou R, Dempsey PC, DiPietro L, Ekelund U, Firth J, Friedenreich CM, Garcia L, Gichu M, 
Jago R, Katzmarzyk PT, … Willumsen JF (2020). World Health Organization 2020 guidelines on 
physical activity and sedentary behaviour. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 54(24), 1451–1462. 
10.1136/bjsports-2020-102955 [PubMed: 33239350] Hojjatinia et al. Page 15
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Collins LM (2018). Optimization of Behavioral, Biobehavioral, and Biomedical Interventions: 
The Multiphase Optimization Strategy (MOST). Springer International Publishing. 
10.1007/978-3-319-72206-1
Conroy DE, Hojjatinia S, Lagoa CM, Yang C-H, Lanza ST, & Smyth JM (2019). Personalized models 
of physical activity responses to text message micro-interventions: A proof-of-concept application 
of control systems engineering methods. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 41, 172–180. 10.1016/
j.psychsport.2018.06.011 [PubMed: 30853855] 
Conroy DE, Lagoa CM, Hekler EB, & Rivera DE (2020). Engineering person-specific behavioral 
interventions to promote physical activity. Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews, 48(4), 170–179. 
10.1249/JES.0000000000000232 [PubMed: 32658043] 
Conroy DE, Yang C-H, & Maher JP (2014). Behavior change techniques in top-ranked 
physical activity apps. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 46(6), 649–652. 10.1016/
j.amepre.2014.01.010 [PubMed: 24842742] 
Czajkowski SM, Powell LH, Adler N, Naar-King S, Reynolds KD, Hunter CM, Laraia B, Olster DH, 
Perna FM, Peterson JC, Epel E, Boyington JE, & Charlson ME (2015). From ideas to efficacy: 
The ORBIT model for developing behavioral treatments for chronic diseases. Health Psychology, 
34(10), 971–982. 10.1037/hea0000161 [PubMed: 25642841] 
Dietz WH (2017). Obesity and excessive weight gain in young adults: New targets for prevention. 
JAMA, 318(3), 241–242. 10.1001/jama.2017.6119 [PubMed: 28719674] 
Feehan LM, Geldman J, Sayre EC, Park C, Ezzat AM, Yoo JY , Hamilton CB, & Li LC (2018). 
Accuracy of Fitbit devices: Systematic review and narrative syntheses of quantitative data. JMIR 
MHealth and UHealth, 6(8), e10527. 10.2196/10527 [PubMed: 30093371] 
Ford DH, & Lerner RM (1992). Developmental systems theory: An integrative approach. Sage.
Freedson PS, Melanson E, & Sirard J (1998). Calibration of the Computer Science and Applications, 
Inc. Accelerometer. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 30(5), 777–781. [PubMed: 
9588623] 
Freigoun MT, Martín CA, Magann AB, Rivera DE, Phatak SS, Korinek EV , & Hekler EB (2017). 
System identification of Just Walk: A behavioral mHealth intervention for promoting physical 
activity. 2017 American Control Conference (ACC), 116–121. 10.23919/ACC.2017.7962940
Hall KS, Hyde ET, Bassett DR, Carlson SA, Carnethon MR, Ekelund U, Evenson KR, Galuska 
DA, Kraus WE, Lee I-M, Matthews CE, Omura JD, Paluch AE, Thomas WI, & Fulton JE 
(2020). Systematic review of the prospective association of daily step counts with risk of 
mortality, cardiovascular disease, and dysglycemia. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition 
and Physical Activity, 17(1), 78. 10.1186/s12966-020-00978-9
Hekler EB, Buman MP, Poothakandiyil N, Rivera DE, Dzierzewski JM, Morgan AA, McCrae CS, 
Roberts BL, Marsiske M, & Giacobbi PR (2013). Exploring behavioral markers of long-term 
physical activity maintenance: A case study of system identification modeling within a behavioral 
intervention. Health Education & Behavior, 40(1 Suppl), 51S–62S. 10.1177/1090198113496787 
[PubMed: 24084400] 
Hekler EB, Klasnja P, Chevance G, Golaszewski NM, Lewis D, & Sim I (2019). Why we need a small 
data paradigm. BMC Medicine, 17(1), 133. 10.1186/s12916-019-1366-x [PubMed: 31311528] 
Imboden MT, Nelson MB, Kaminsky LA, & Montoye AH (2018). Comparison of four Fitbit and 
Jawbone activity monitors with a research-grade ActiGraph accelerometer for estimating physical 
activity and energy expenditure. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 52(13), 844–850. 10.1136/
bjsports-2016-096990 [PubMed: 28483930] 
Klasnja P, Hekler EB, Shiffman S, Boruvka A, Almirall D, Tewari A, & Murphy SA 
(2015). Microrandomized trials: An experimental design for developing just-in-time adaptive 
interventions. Health Psychology, 34 Suppl, 1220–1228. 10.1037/hea0000305
Klasnja P, Smith S, Seewald NJ, Lee A, Hall K, Luers B, Hekler EB, & Murphy SA (2018). Efficacy 
of contextually tailored suggestions for physical activity: A micro-randomized optimization trial of 
HeartSteps. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 53(6), 573–582. 10.1093/abm/kay067
Kraus WE, Janz KF, Powell KE, Campbell WW, Jakicic JM, Troiano RP, Sprow K, Torres A, Piercy 
KL, & 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines Advisory Committee. (2019). Daily step counts for Hojjatinia et al. Page 16
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
measuring physical activity exposure and its relation to health. Medicine and Science in Sports and 
Exercise, 51(6), 1206–1212. 10.1249/MSS.0000000000001932 [PubMed: 31095077] 
Laranjo L, Ding D, Heleno B, Kocaballi B, Quiroz JC, Tong HL, Chahwan B, Neves AL, Gabarron 
E, Dao KP, Rodrigues D, Neves GC, Antunes ML, Coiera E, & Bates DW (2020). Do smartphone 
applications and activity trackers increase physical activity in adults? Systematic review, meta­
analysis and metaregression. British Journal of Sports Medicine. 10.1136/bjsports-2020-102892
Liao P, Greenewald K, Klasnja P, & Murphy S (2020). Personalized HeartSteps: A reinforcement 
learning algorithm for optimizing physical activity. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, 
Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 4(1), 18:1–18:22. 10.1145/3381007
Liu K, Daviglus ML, Loria CM, Colangelo LA, Spring B, Moller AC, & Lloyd-Jones DM 
(2012). Healthy lifestyle through young adulthood and the presence of low cardiovascular 
disease risk profile in middle age: The Coronary Artery Risk Development in (Young) Adults 
(CARDIA) study. Circulation, 125(8), 996–1004. 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.111.060681 
[PubMed: 22291127] 
McVay MA, Bennett GG, Steinberg D, & V oils CI (2019). Dose-response research in digital health 
interventions: Concepts, considerations, and challenges. Health Psychology, 38(12), 1168–1174. 
10.1037/hea0000805 [PubMed: 31580127] 
Michie S, Abraham C, Whittington C, McAteer J, & Gupta S (2009). Effective techniques in healthy 
eating and physical activity interventions: A meta-regression. Health Psychology, 28(6), 690–701. 
10.1037/a0016136 [PubMed: 19916637] 
Molenaar PCM (2004). A manifesto on psychology as idiographic science: Bringing the person 
back into scientific psychology, this time forever. Measurement: Interdisciplinary Research and 
Perspectives, 2(4), 201–218. 10.1207/s15366359mea0204_1
Monaghan M (2014). The Affordable Care Act and implications for young adult health. Translational 
Behavioral Medicine, 4(2), 170–174. 10.1007/s13142-013-0245-9 [PubMed: 24904700] 
Nahum-Shani I, Smith SN, Spring BJ, Collins LM, Witkiewitz K, Tewari A, & Murphy SA 
(2018). Just-in-time adaptive interventions (JITAIs) in mobile health: Key components and design 
principles for ongoing health behavior support. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 52(6), 446–462. 
10.1007/s12160-016-9830-8 [PubMed: 27663578] 
Nelson MC, Story M, Larson NI, Neumark-Sztainer D, & Lytle LA (2008). Emerging adulthood 
and college-aged youth: An overlooked age for weight-related behavior change. Obesity, 16(10), 
2205–2211. 10.1038/oby.2008.365 [PubMed: 18719665] 
Nesselroade JR, Molenaar PCM, Lerner RM, Lamb ME, & Freund AM (2010). Emphasizing 
intraindividual variability in the study of development over the life span. In The Handbook of Life­
Span Development (V ol. 1, pp. 30–54). John Wiley & Sons. 10.1002/9780470880166.hlsd001002
Pépin JL, Bruno RM, Yang R-Y , Vercamer V , Jouhaud P, Escourrou P, & Boutouyrie P (2020). 
Wearable activity trackers for monitoring adherence to home confinement during the COVID-19 
pandemic worldwide: Data aggregation and analysis. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(6), 
e19787. 10.2196/19787 [PubMed: 32501803] 
Pew Research Center. (2019). Mobile fact sheet. Author. https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/fact­
sheet/mobile/
Phatak SS, Freigoun MT, Martín CA, Rivera DE, Korinek EV , Adams MA, Buman MP, Klasnja P, 
& Hekler EB (2018). Modeling individual differences: A case study of the application of system 
identification for personalizing a physical activity intervention. Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 
79, 82–97. 10.1016/j.jbi.2018.01.010 [PubMed: 29409750] 
Piercy KL, Troiano RP, Ballard RM, Carlson SA, Fulton JE, Galuska DA, George SM, & Olson RD 
(2018). The Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans. JAMA, 320(19), 2020–2028. 10.1001/
jama.2018.14854 [PubMed: 30418471] 
Powell KE, Paluch AE, & Blair SN (2011). Physical activity for health: What kind? How much? 
How intense? On top of what? Annual Review of Public Health, 32, 349–365. 10.1146/annurev­
publhealth-031210-101151
Riley WT, Martin CA, Rivera DE, Hekler EB, Adams MA, Buman MP, Pavel M, & King AC 
(2016). Development of a dynamic computational model of social cognitive theory. Translational 
Behavioral Medicine, 6(4), 483–495. 10.1007/s13142-015-0356-6 [PubMed: 27848208] Hojjatinia et al. Page 17
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Riley WT, Rivera DE, Atienza AA, Nilsen W, Allison SM, & Mermelstein R (2011). Health behavior 
models in the age of mobile interventions: Are our theories up to the task? Translational 
Behavioral Medicine, 1(1), 53–71. 10.1007/s13142-011-0021-7 [PubMed: 21796270] 
Saint-Maurice PF, Troiano RP, Bassett DR, Graubard BI, Carlson SA, Shiroma EJ, Fulton JE, & 
Matthews CE (2020). Association of daily step count and step intensity with mortality among us 
adults. JAMA, 323(12), 1151–1160. 10.1001/jama.2020.1382 [PubMed: 32207799] 
Salmon J, Owen N, Crawford D, Bauman A, & Sallis JF (2003). Physical activity and sedentary 
behavior: A population-based study of barriers, enjoyment, and preference. Health Psychology, 
22(2), 178–188. 10.1037//0278-6133.22.2.178 [PubMed: 12683738] 
Smith DM, Duque L, Huffman JC, Healy BC, & Celano CM (2020). Text message interventions 
for physical activity: A systematic review and meta-analysis. American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, 58(1), 142–151. 10.1016/j.amepre.2019.08.014 [PubMed: 31759805] 
Tison GH, Avram R, Kuhar P, Abreau S, Marcus GM, Pletcher MJ, & Olgin JE (2020). Worldwide 
effect of COVID-19 on physical activity: A descriptive study. Annals of Internal Medicine, 173(9), 
767–770. 10.7326/M20-2665 [PubMed: 32598162] 
Towner EK, Idalski Carcone A, Ghosh S, Ondersma S, & Stylianou M (2020). Adapting 
pharmacological dose-finding designs for early phase behavioral intervention development 
research. Health Psychology. 10.1037/hea0001024
Tudor-Locke C, Craig CL, Brown WJ, Clemes SA, De Cocker K, Giles-Corti B, Hatano Y , Inoue S, 
Matsudo SM, Mutrie N, Oppert J-M, Rowe DA, Schmidt MD, Schofield GM, Spence JC, Teixeira 
PJ, Tully MA, & Blair SN (2011). How many steps/day are enough? For adults. International 
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 8, 79. 10.1186/1479-5868-8-79
Turrisi TB, Bittel KM, West AB, Hojjatinia S, Hojjatinia S, Mama SK, Lagoa CM, & Conroy DE 
(2021). Seasons, weather, and device-measured movement behaviors: A scoping review from 2006 
to 2020. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 18(1), 24. 10.1186/
s12966-021-01091-1
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (2018). 2018 Physical Activity Guidelines for 
Americans (2nd edition) (p. 118). U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. https://
health.gov/paguidelines/second-edition/pdf/Physical_Activity_Guidelines_2nd_edition.pdf
Van Rossum G, & Drake FL (2009). Python 3 Reference Manual. CreateSpace.
V oils CI, Chang Y , Crandell J, Leeman J, Sandelowski M, & Maciejewski ML (2012). Informing 
the dosing of interventions in randomized trials. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 33(6), 1225–1230. 
10.1016/j.cct.2012.07.011 [PubMed: 22841930] 
V oils CI, King HA, Maciejewski ML, Allen KD, Yancy WS, & Shaffer JA (2014). Approaches for 
informing optimal dose of behavioral interventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 48(3), 392–
401. 10.1007/s12160-014-9618-7 [PubMed: 24722964] 
Welch WA, Spring B, Phillips SM, & Siddique J (2018). Moderating effects of weather-related factors 
on a physical activity intervention. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 54(5), e83–e89. 
10.1016/j.amepre.2018.01.025 [PubMed: 29551330] 
Wongvibulsin S, Martin SS, Saria S, Zeger SL, & Murphy SA (2020). An individualized, data-driven 
digital approach for precision behavior change. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine, 14(3), 
289–293. 10.1177/1559827619843489 [PubMed: 32477031] Hojjatinia et al. Page 18
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author Manuscript Author ManuscriptHojjatinia et al. Page 19Table 1.
Features of step and impulse responses in the distribution of person-specific models and a generic model.
Response Feature Type of messagesPerson-Specific Models Generic Model
Weekday Weekend
Weekday Weekend M (SD) Range M (SD) Range
Peak Magnitude
Move more 35.40 (17.91) (8.07, 92.98) 50.94 (22.50) (14.17, 105.45) 6.1 8.8
Sit less 33.95 (19.11) (7.91, 108.3) 48.52 (20.74) (8.94, 106.42) 7.8 9.05
Inspirational quotes 49.22 (22.45) (17.66, 110.59) 65.60 (36.50) (19.67, 197.33) 9.84 8.67
Peak Delay
Move more 28.33 (23.11) (0, 60) 27.66 (22.82) (0, 60) 0 15
Sit less 25 (24.77) (0, 60) 29.33 (21.91) (0, 60) 0 60
Inspirational quotes 26.33 (22.42) (0, 60) 25.33 (23.89) (0, 60) 0 30
Steady State
Move more 17.26 (93.42) (−263.45, 239.68) 47.88 (164.97) (−338.48, 445.79) 7.61 45.83
Sit less 30.62 (91.29) (−221.58, 319.36) 54.41 (163.73) (−287.12, 504.76) 25.18 53.37
Inspirational quotes 20.85 (115.49) (−186.37, 267.67) −11.54 (224.35) (−467.42, 550.72) 11.11 −18.09
Settling Time
Move more 138.33 (44.75) (75, 300) 167.33 (53.22) (75, 330) 60 150
Sit less 140.66 (63.01) (45, 360) 163.66 (53.01) (75, 315) 135 165
Inspirational quotes 126.66 (44.60) (75, 285) 157.33 (63.93) (60, 360) 60 195
Rise Time
Move more 62 (42.85) (0, 150) 80.66 (59.16) (0, 210) 15 120
Sit less 64 (48.75) (0, 225) 95 (57.56) (0, 255) 90 135
Inspirational quotes 63 (38.85) (0, 165) 79.33 (52.51) (0, 195) 15 105
Effective Time
Move more 175.66 (238.53) (15, 600) 154 (228.70) (15, 600) 30 240
Sit less 129.66 (202.69) (15, 600) 225.33 (256.52) (15, 600) 240 315
Inspirational quotes 224.66 (263.51) (15, 600) 231 (266.25) (15, 600) 45 15
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2022 August 01.
