Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology and Health
ISSN: 0887-0446 (Print) 1476-8321 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Motivational and behavioural consequences
of self-affirmation interventions: A study of
sunscreen use among women
D.C. Jessop, L.V. Simmonds & P. Sparks
To cite this article:  D.C. Jessop, L.V. Simmonds & P. Sparks (2009) Motivational and behavioural
consequences of self-affirmation interventions: A study of sunscreen use among women,
Psychology and Health, 24:5, 529-544, DOI: 10.1080/08870440801930320
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870440801930320
Published online: 27 May 2009.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2126
View related articles 
Citing articles: 10 View citing articles 

Psychology and Health
Vol. 24, No. 5, June 2009, 529–544
Motivational and behavioural consequences of self-affirmation
interventions: A study of sunscreen use among women
D.C. Jessop *, L.V. Simmonds and P. Sparks
Department of Psychology, University of Sussex, Pevensey 1, Brighton,
BN1 9QH, United Kingdom
(Received 13 July 2007; final version received 17 January 2008 )
The reported study compared the efficacy of three self-affirmation manipulations
in reducing defensive processing and instigating behaviour change in response to
personally relevant information about the health risks of sunbathing. Whitefemale sunbathers ( N¼162) were recruited on a beach in the south of England.
Participants were randomly allocated to a ‘values affirmation’ condition, a
‘kindness affirmation’ condition, a ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition, or a no
affirmation ‘control’ condition. In the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition theself-affirmation task was incorporated into a leaflet presenting the healthrisk information. Findings supported the hypothesis that participants in the
three self-affirmation conditions would engage in less-defensive processing of the
health-risk information than those in the ‘control’ condition. For the behaviouralmeasure, however, only those participants in the ‘positive traits affirmation’
condition were more likely to request a free sample of sunscreen than those in the
control condition. The implications of these findings for self-affirmation theoryand the development of effective health promotion campaigns are discussed.
Keywords: self-affirmation; defensive processing; health-risk information; health
promotion; sunscreen use; sunbathing
Health-detrimental behaviours such as cigarette smoking and excessive alcohol
consumption contribute to many leading causes of mortality and morbidity(Smith, Orleans, & Jenkins, 2004). Nonetheless, many people continue to engage inhealth-detrimental behaviours and, accordingly, much time and effort is expendeddesigning health promotion campaigns to deter people from performing such behaviours.Campaigns frequently focus on making salient the health-risk afforded by the behaviourin question, the rationale being that the information will result in a perception ofthreat and a subsequent increased motivation to avoid the targeted behaviour. However,
research evaluating such campaigns has yielded mixed results and reviews of the
literature have questioned the efficacy of threatening recipients (Keller, 1999; Ruiter,Abraham, & Kok, 2001). More specifically, research findings suggest that people mayengage in defensive processing of threatening health-risk information, particularly if it is
*Corresponding author. Email: d.jessop@sussex.ac.uk
ISSN 0887–0446 print/ISSN 1476–8321 online
/C2232009 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/08870440801930320http://www.informaworld.com
personally relevant (e.g. Freeman, Hennessy, & Marzullo, 2001; Liberman & Chaiken,
1992; Reed & Aspinwall, 1998). Ironically, therefore, some studies have shown that thoseat whom such health promotion campaigns are aimed (i.e. those who engage in thehealth-detrimental behaviour in question) are the most likely to derogate themessage (Freeman et al., 2001) and the least likely to be persuaded by it (Liberman
& Chaiken, 1992).
The apparent tendency for people to process personally relevant health-risk
information defensively can be explained from the perspective of self-affirmation theory(Steele, 1988). Self-affirmation theory contends that people are continually motivated touphold their self-integrity, where the latter has been described as the belief that the self is‘adaptively and morally adequate, that is, competent, good, coherent, unitary, stable,capable of free choice, capable of controlling important outcomes ...’ (Steele, 1988,
p. 262). Being informed that one’s behaviour is detrimental to one’s health may be
construed as a threat to self-integrity, insofar as such information compromises one’s
ability to perceive oneself as an individual of worth and ‘adaptive and moral adequacy’(Steele, 1988, p. 263). Accordingly, when people are faced with information detailingthe health-detrimental consequences of their chosen behaviours, the need to protect theirself-integrity may well engender biased and defensive processing of the message as a meansof ameliorating the threat and restoring one’s sense of self as a healthy and rationalindividual (Sherman & Cohen, 2006). Recipients of such information may thus continue toengage in the targeted behaviour, as making a behavioural change would require them to
acknowledge that they have behaved in an unwise manner in the past.
Self-affirmation theory additionally contends, however, that ‘the self-system is flexible’
(Sherman & Cohen, 2006, p. 188), insofar as threats to self-integrity can be countered byaffirming the self in a separate important domain (Steele, 1988). Accordingly, it followsthat if individuals are given the opportunity to reflect on an alternative source ofself-integrity, this will allow them to maintain their overall sense of self-integrity in the faceof a personally relevant health-risk message (Steele, 1988). Consequently, they should bemore willing to consider information criticising their health-detrimental behaviour,
without needing to engage in defensive processing of such information (e.g. Reed
& Aspinwall, 1988). Therefore, self-affirmation theory predicts that affirming the self, in adomain which is unrelated to the threatened domain, should allow individuals to respondto personally relevant health promotion campaigns in a more open and less-biasedmanner, rendering them more susceptible to persuasion and, ultimately, behaviour change(e.g. Sherman, Nelson, & Steele, 2000).
While much evidence has accumulated in support of the position that, in general,
self-affirmations can reduce defensive responses to threats, the evidence regarding their
ability to reduce biased processing and increase acceptance of personally relevant
health-related information is mixed (Harris & Napper, 2005; McQueen & Klein, 2006).In one of the first tests of a self-affirmation manipulation in a health-related domain, Reedand Aspinwall (1988) affirmed participants prior to exposure to information about a linkbetween caffeine consumption and fibrocystic breast disease (FBD), by asking them togive examples of occasions when they had engaged in a number of ‘kindness’ behaviours.It was hypothesised that higher risk participants who were affirmed would be less likely toengage in biased processing of the information than higher risk participants who were not
affirmed. The results partially supported this hypothesis: for example, compared to their
non-affirmed counterparts, higher risk affirmed participants rated risk-confirminginformation as more convincing than risk-disconfirming information. They alsoreported having higher perceptions of control over their ability to reduce their530 D.C. Jessop et al.
caffeine consumption. However, a reduction in biased processing was not apparent for all
outcome measures and, indeed, affirmed higher risk participants reported significantlylower intentions to reduce their caffeine consumption than did non-affirmed higherrisk participants.
Two studies providing more compelling evidence that self-affirmation manipulations
can reduce defensive processing and increase acceptance of personally relevant health-risk
information are reported by Sherman et al. (2000). In their first study they affirmedparticipants after exposure to information about a link between caffeine and FBD, byasking them to complete a scale relating to their highest ranked value. They found thataffirmed higher risk participants reported greater message acceptance and higherintentions to reduce their caffeine consumption compared to non-affirmed higher riskparticipants. In a second study they affirmed participants prior to exposure to health-riskinformation about AIDS, by asking them to write about their most important value.
Their findings indicated that affirmed sexually active participants reported higher
perceived likelihood of contracting HIV compared to their non-affirmed counterparts.They were also more likely to take away leaflets about HIV and purchase condoms at theend of the study.
Using a similar manipulation to Sherman et al. (2000, Study 2), Harris and Napper
(2005) affirmed participants prior to exposure to information about the link betweenalcohol consumption and breast cancer. Harris and Napper (2005) predicted that affirmedhigher risk participants would be more likely to accept the information compared to
their non-affirmed counterparts. Their results provided some support for this hypothesis.
Thus, affirmed higher risk participants reported greater fear arousal on reading themessage, greater ease of imagining themselves developing breast cancer as a result ofconsuming alcohol, higher perceptions of risk of contracting this disease, and higherintentions to reduce their alcohol consumption. Furthermore, these effects appeared to berelatively stable, insofar as they were maintained at 1-week and 1-month follow-up.However, the authors found no evidence that self-affirmation influenced alcoholconsumption over the subsequent month.
In further support of the ability of self-affirmation manipulations to reduce defensive
processing and increase message acceptance in response to personally relevant health-riskinformation, Harris, Mayle, Mabbott and Napper (2007) demonstrated that self-affirmedsmokers, who had been asked to list their desirable characteristics, reported less-defensiveresponses to graphic images of the health consequences of smoking on some, but not all,indices. Specifically, affirmed smokers perceived the images to be more threatening andpersonally relevant than did non-affirmed smokers. They also reported more negativethoughts and feelings about smoking, higher levels of control and self-efficacy regarding
cutting back on the number of cigarettes smoked, and higher intentions to cut back.
However, once again, the authors found no evidence that self-affirmation impacted onsmoking behaviour as reported at 1-week follow-up.
Therefore, while there is some support for the prediction that self-affirmation
manipulations can prompt reduced defensive processing and increased acceptance ofpersonally relevant health-risk information, the evidence is mixed. Indeed, the findingsof the studies presented above are amongst the most persuasive regarding the efficacy ofself-affirmation manipulations in health-related domains, with other studies indicating
that such manipulations can precipitate ‘increased’ defensive processing and ‘reduced’
acceptance of health-risk information among some recipients (e.g. Boney-McCoy,Gibbons, & Gerrard, 1999). Accordingly, there has been a call for further research toexplore the effects of self-affirmations in health-related contexts (Harris & Napper, 2005).Psychology and Health 531
Furthermore, a number of explicit limitations to our understanding of the effects
of self-affirmation manipulations in health-related contexts can be identified (McQueen
& Klein, 2006). First, only a handful of studies have explored the effects of self-affirmation
manipulations on behavioural change following exposure to personally relevanthealth-risk information (Harris et al., 2007; Harris & Napper, 2005; Reed & Aspinwall,1988; Sherman et al., 2000), and only one of these clearly demonstrated any behavioural
effects (Sherman et al., 2000; cf Reed & Aspinwall, 1988). Given that the utility of
self-affirmation manipulations from a health promotion perspective is likely to becontingent on their capacity to promote behavioural change, rather than a reduction in
defensive processing per se , it is imperative that further research explores the ability of such
manipulations to facilitate the cessation of health-detrimental behaviours or adoption ofhealth-beneficial behaviours.
Second, the vast majority of self-affirmation research has been conducted using college
or university student samples (McQueen & Klein, 2006), a limitation that applies to all ofthe health-related self-affirmation studies described above. Furthermore, self-affirmation
manipulations are frequently complex and time-intensive to operationalise, and hence
require motivated participants. Accordingly, it is not known whether such manipulationscan be modified to be appropriate for ‘real-world’ contexts (McQueen & Klein, 2006).
In the context of health promotion, it is unlikely that recipients of personally relevant
health-risk information could be expected to complete relatively complicated and lengthyself-affirmation manipulations typical of those used in existing research. Certainly, such anapproach is unlikely to be practicable within large-scale health promotion campaigns.
Consequently, research is needed to explore whether simplified versions of existing
self-affirmation manipulations might be both effective and able to be integrated intohealth promotion materials.
A third limitation to our understanding of self-affirmation is that little is known about
how to operationalise it optimally (McQueen & Klein, 2006). It is apparent from the
research presented above that various techniques have been utilised to induce
self-affirmation in health-related domains, and – to date – little attention has beendirected towards exploring which manipulations are most effective and/or why this mightbe the case. Indeed, as far as we are aware, no published research has compared the effects
of different self-affirmation manipulations in a health-related domain.
1Previous research
findings could be taken as consistent with the suggestion that certain affirmationmanipulations (e.g. the one employed by Sherman et al. [2000, Study 2]) may be more
effective at reducing defensive processing and increasing message acceptance in the face of
personally relevant health-risk information than others (e.g. the one used by Reed andAspinwall [1988]). Furthermore, within health-related contexts, only one self-affirmationmanipulation has been clearly associated with behavioural effects (Sherman et al., 2000,
Study 2). In order to ascertain whether any differences in outcomes can be attributed to
different manipulations per se , however, research is needed that directly explores the
relative efficacy of different self-affirmation manipulations in a health-related context.
In light of these limitations, the current study had two main aims. The first of these was
to compare the efficacy of three types of affirmation manipulation in terms of their ability
to reduce defensive processing, increase message acceptance, and instigate behavioural
change in response to personally relevant information about the health risks ofsunbathing, using a non-student sample (sunbathers on a UK beach). The second aimof the study was to explore whether a simple affirmation manipulation could be integrated
into the text of a health promotion leaflet to positive effect.532 D.C. Jessop et al.
Sunbathing without protection is an important risk factor for skin cancer, which
represents a serious contemporary health threat (Cancer Research UK, 2004; Jackson
& Aiken, 2006). However, the implementation of relatively simple precautionary measures,
such as using sun-protection factor 15 or greater (SPF 15 þ) on exposed skin, represents an
effective means of preventing the onset of skin cancer (Cancer Research UK, 2004;
Jackson & Aiken, 2006). Actively seeking a suntan is thought to be a predominantlyfemale activity, and sunbathing behaviours are believed to involve different motivational
processes for men and women (Jackson & Aiken, 2000). We, therefore, decided to focus on
females in the current study.
The current study utilised two existing self-affirmation manipulations: a ‘values
affirmation’ task based on that used by Sherman et al. (2000, Study 2) and Harris and
Napper (2005) and a ‘kindness affirmation’ task based on that used by Reed and
Aspinwall (1988). Our rationale for selecting these affirmation manipulations was
two-fold. First, they have been shown to reduce defensive processing and increase
message acceptance in the face of personally relevant health-risk information on at least
some outcomes. Second, we considered them to be amenable for use with a real-worldpopulation, insofar as they were relatively brief and could be completed in a single sitting
(i.e. they did not require participants to complete two separate questionnaires, the first of
which would need to be analysed before the appropriate version of the second could be
distributed, cf Sherman et al., 2000, Study 1).
The study additionally included a third self-affirmation manipulation, developed
for the purpose of this study, which required participants to indicate whether each
of a number of positively valenced traits were true of them. This ‘positive traits
affirmation’ task was designed to be brief, able to be completed in a single sittingand – crucially – amenable for integration into a health-promotion leaflet.
In accordance with self-affirmation theory, it was hypothesised that sunbathers in the
three affirmation conditions would engage in less defensive processing and greateracceptance of the information in a health promotion leaflet detailing the risks of
sunbathing and the benefits of using sunscreen compared to controls. Specifically, it was
predicted that affirmed participants would report less avoidance of the message, less
derogation of the message, higher levels of response-efficacy and self-efficacy, more
positive attitudes towards sunscreen use, and higher intentions to use sunscreen than
would non-affirmed participants. It was additionally predicted that affirmed participants
would report more negative affect on reading the leaflet and less positive self-feeling andmood in general than would non-affirmed participants, as such responses are consistent
with acceptance of the health-risk information (Harris & Napper, 2005; cf Sherman et al.,
2000). Furthermore, it was predicted that participants in the affirmation conditions would
be more likely to take a free sample of sunscreen.
2
Method
Participants
An opportunity sample of 169 female sunbathers on a beach in the south of England
completed the Time 1 measures. Three participants in the ‘values affirmation’ condition
did not complete the values affirmation task; one participant in the ‘kindness
affirmation’ condition and two participants in the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition
responded positively to fewer than half of the affirmation items (see below).
As these participants are unlikely to have been affirmed, they were removed from thePsychology and Health 533
data analysis. All participants responded to the health-risk information check (refer
‘Materials’ section) in a manner consistent with their having read the health promotion
leaflet. The final sample thus comprised 163 females, all of who indicated that White
European or White Other best described their ethnicity. Participants’ ages ranged from 18to 82 years ( M¼33.33; SD ¼13.97). Seventy-four (45.40%) participants indicated
that they were currently wearing sunscreen, 89 (54.60%) participants indicated that they
were not.
Materials
Questionnaire 1Demographic information. Participants were asked to indicate their age and ethnicity.
Past behaviour. Participants’ past behaviour was measured by two items: ‘In the past two
weeks how often have you used sunscreen, Sun Protection Factor (SPF) 15 or above, onexposed skin when sunbathing?’ (‘never’ [1] to ‘every time’ [9]) and ‘I have used
sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposed skin each time I have sunbathed during the past
two weeks’ (‘strongly disagree’ [1] to ‘strongly agree’ [9]). These two items were highlycorrelated, r(161)¼0.90, p< 0.001, and a mean score was calculated for each
participant, with higher scores indicating more frequent sunscreen use when sunbathing
in the previous 2 weeks.
Current sunscreen use. Participants’ current use of sunscreen was measured by the single
item ‘Are you currently wearing sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposed skin?’ (‘yes’/‘no’).
Self-affirmation manipulations
Following Sherman et al. (2000, Study 2) and Harris & Napper (2005), participants in the
‘values affirmation’ condition were asked to choose their most important value and writea short statement about it, focussing on why the value was so important to them and how
it had influenced their behaviour.
Following Reed and Aspinwall (1998), participants in the ‘kindness affirmation’
condition were asked to respond to 10 questions which required them to indicate whetherthey had performed each of 10 kindness behaviours. If they responded in the affirmative,a brief space was provided for them to give an example. An example question is ‘Have you
ever been considerate of another person’s feelings?’ (yes/no).
Participants in the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition were asked to indicate whether
they were ‘enthusiastic’, ‘keen’, ‘conscientious’, ‘hardworking’, ‘intelligent’, ‘open-minded’,‘responsible’, and ‘determined’ by circling either ‘yes’ or ‘no’ for each trait. They weresubsequently exposed to the following information ‘If you have responded yes to any of
the above then you would be an ideal candidate to take part in our ‘Safety in the Sun 2006
Challenge’ to use sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) when sunbathing for the rest of this year.What you decide to do today can alter the quality of the life that you will enjoy inthe future. It’s up to you. You are a unique and special person. Don’t you deserve
looking after?’.
Participants in the ‘control’ condition received no self-affirmation task and were given
the health promotion leaflet directly after completing Questionnaire 1.534 D.C. Jessop et al.
Health promotion leaflet
Participants were asked to read a health promotion leaflet entitled ‘Skin Cancer and Sun
Safety’. The leaflet ( /C24200 words) was designed to be short and easy to read on the beach.
It was printed on high-quality colour paper and imitated a typical health promotion leaflet
in terms of size and layout. The leaflet presented five facts detailing the risks of skin cancer
(e.g. ‘Most causes of skin cancer are caused by over exposure to ultraviolet radiation from
the sun’). Subsequently, the leaflet presented ‘the good news’, which detailed how ‘most
skin cancers are preventable by protecting ourselves from the sun’s damaging rays’.The leaflet then presented facts highlighting the benefits of using sunscreen (e.g. ‘using
sunscreen [SPF 15 or above] is very effective and can block up to 96% of UV radiation’),
and the ease with which sunscreen can be used (e.g. ‘sunscreen is quite inexpensive, safe
and easy to use and definitely helps provide safer tanning’). Participants were then invited
to join the ‘Safety in the Sun 2006 Challenge’ to use sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) onexposed skin when sunbathing for the rest of the year and given some suggestions on how
to use sunscreen effectively (e.g. ‘Reapply every 2 hours’). All the information given in the
leaflet was factually correct.
Questionnaire 2
After reading the health promotion leaflet, participants were asked to complete a further
questionnaire, which included the following measures.
Health-risk information check. In order to confirm that participants had read the health
promotion leaflet, they were asked to write down what the leaflet was about.
Prior knowledge. Participants were asked to respond to the item ‘I already knew all the
information presented in the leaflet’ (‘strongly disagree’ [1] to ‘strongly agree’ [9]).
Negative affect. Participants were asked to what extent they felt (i) afraid, (ii) frightened,
(iii) worried and (iv) uncomfortable while reading the leaflet (‘not at all’ [1] to ‘very much’[9]; adapted from Ruiter, Verplanken, Kok, & Werrij, 2003). This scale was found to have
a high level of internal reliability, /C11¼0.93, and a mean score was calculated for each
participant, with higher scores indicating greater negative affect.
Defensive avoidance. Defensive avoidance of the message was measured by the single item
‘When I read the message about skin cancer my first reaction was that I did not want to
think about skin cancer’ (‘totally disagree’ [1] to ‘totally agree’ [9]; adapted from Ruiter
et al., 2003).
Message derogation. Derogation of the message was assessed by four items. Participants
were asked to what extent they felt the information about skin cancer (i) was overblown,
(ii) was exaggerated, (iii) tried to manipulate their feelings and (iv) tried to strain the
truth (‘totally disagree’ [1] to ‘totally agree’ [9]; adapted from Ruiter et al., 2003).This scale was found to have a high level of internal reliability, /C11¼0.88, and a mean score
was calculated for each participant, with higher scores indicating greater levels of
message derogation.Psychology and Health 535
Response-efficacy. Participants’ beliefs in the effectiveness of using sunscreen on exposed
skin when sunbathing in the next two weeks were measured by two items: ‘If I use
sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposed skin when sunbathing in the next two weeks it will
reduce my chances of getting skin cancer’ and ‘Using sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) onexposed skin when sunbathing in the next two weeks is an effective way to reduce mychances of getting skin cancer’ (‘totally disagree’ [1] to ‘totally agree’ [9]; adapted from
Ruiter et al., 2003). These two items were highly correlated, r(160)¼0.81, p< 0.001, and a
mean score was calculated for each participant with higher scores representing higherlevels of response-efficacy.
Self-efficacy. Participants’ beliefs about their ability to use sunscreen on exposed skin
when sunbathing in the next two weeks were measured by two items: ‘If I wanted to, it
would be easy for me to use sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposed skin when I am nextsunbathing’ and ‘Using sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposed skin each time I sunbathe
in the next two weeks will be very easy to do’ (‘totally disagree’ [1] to ‘totally agree’ [9];
adapted from Ruiter et al., 2003). These two items were highly correlated, r(160)¼0.69,
p< 0.001, and a mean score was calculated for each participant with higher scores
representing higher levels of self-efficacy.
Attitude. Participants’ attitudes towards using sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposed
skin when sunbathing in the next two weeks were assessed by asking them to rate thisbehaviour on four pairs of semantic differentials (‘bad’ [1] to ‘good’ [9], ‘negative’ [1] to‘positive’ [9], ‘foolish’ [1] to ‘wise’ [9], and ‘unpleasant’ [1] to ‘pleasant’ [9]). This scale was
found to have a high level of internal reliability, /C11¼0.90, and a mean score was calculated
for each participant with higher scores indicating more positive attitudes.
Intention. Participants’ intentions to use sunscreen on exposed skin when sunbathing in
the next two weeks were measured by two items: ‘I intend to use sunscreen (SPF 15 or
above) on exposed skin every time I sunbathe in the next two weeks’ (‘totally disagree’ [1]
to ‘totally agree’ [9]) and ‘Do you intend to use sunscreen (SPF 15 or above) on exposedskin when sunbathing in the next two weeks?’ (‘not at all’ [1] to ‘always’ [9]). Thecorrelation between these two items was high, r(159)¼0.90, p< 0.001, and a mean score
was calculated for each participant, with higher scores indicating higher intentions.
Self-feelings. Following Sherman et al. (2000), participants’ self-feelings were assessed by
the item: ‘How do you currently feel about yourself?’ (‘extremely bad’ [1] to ‘extremelygood’ [9]).
Mood. Following Sherman et al. (2000), participants’ mood was assessed by the item:
‘What is your current mood?’ (‘extremely sad’ [1] to ‘extremely happy’ [9]).
Prior history of skin cancer. Participants were asked to indicate whether they had ever
been diagnosed with skin cancer (‘yes’/‘no’); whether there was a family history of skin
cancer (‘yes’/‘no’) and whether any of their friends had been diagnosed as having skin
cancer (‘yes’/’no’).536 D.C. Jessop et al.
Positive mood induction. To overcome any possible negative mood induced by thoughts
of skin cancer, all participants were asked to write down something they were lookingforward to in the coming year and indicate why they were looking forward to it.
Behavioural measure
Participants were asked to respond to the written question ‘Would you like a free sample
of sunscreen (SPF15 þ)?’ (‘yes’/‘no’). If they responded in the affirmative they were given
a free sample of sunscreen by the researcher.
Procedure
Participants were approached while sunbathing on a beach in the south of England during
a heatwave in July 2006 and asked if they would be willing to take part in a study exploringwomen’s beliefs about sunbathing. The researcher was a White female in her mid-30s.
Participants were sequentially allocated to one of the four conditions: ‘values
affirmation’ ( n¼43), ‘kindness affirmation’ ( n¼40),’ positive traits affirmation’ ( n¼38)
and ‘control’ ( n¼42). For participants in the ‘values affirmation’ and ‘kindness
affirmation’ conditions, the corresponding affirmation task was appended toQuestionnaire 1. For participants in the ‘positive traits’ condition, the affirmation taskwas incorporated into the first page of the health promotion leaflet (the first page of theleaflet given to participants in the other conditions solely presented the title ‘Skin Cancerand Sun Safety’). Participants completed the different parts of the study in their own timein the order described above and returned the materials to the researcher upon completion.Participants took, on average, between 10 and 15 minutes to complete the study.
In order to ensure informed consent, participants were informed at the start of
Questionnaire 1 that the study would ask for their beliefs about sunbathing and that theaim of the study was to explore the effectiveness of health promotion campaigns related tosunbathing. Participants were additionally informed that their responses were confidentialand that they could withdraw from the study at any time, but none chose to do so.
Participants were fully debriefed on completion of the study. The study was approved by
the University of Sussex Department of Psychology Ethics Committee.
Results
Preliminary analysesOne-way ANOVAs revealed no difference between conditions in terms of participants’
age, past behaviour or prior knowledge of the information included in the healthpromotion leaflet (all ps > 0.48). Chi-square analyses similarly revealed no differences
between conditions in terms of current use of sunscreen, personal history of skin cancer,
family history of skin cancer or knowledge of a friend with skin cancer (all ps > 0.38).
Self-affirmation and defensive processing/message acceptance
Overview of analytic strategy
A series of one-way ANOVAs was conducted to establish whether condition influenced
negative affect, defensive avoidance, message derogation, response-efficacy, self-efficacy,Psychology and Health 537
attitude, intention, self-feeling, and mood. Post hoc tests were used to identify any mean
differences. The relevant means and standard deviations are given in Table 1.3
In order to directly address the a priori hypothesis that participants in the three
affirmation conditions would engage in less defensive processing and more messageacceptance than those in the ‘control’ condition, planned contrasts (two-tailed) wereconducted for each dependent variable to test whether the ‘control’ condition differedsignificantly from the other three conditions combined.
Levene’s test of homogeneity of variance was significant for negative affect,
response-efficacy, self-efficacy, attitude and intentions. Equal variances can thus not beassumed for these dependent variables and Games–Howell post hoc tests and planned
contrasts which do not assume equal variances are reported accordingly.
We did not divide the sample into higher and lower relevance participants
(cf Sherman et al., 2000) on the basis of current sunscreen use since all participantswere recruited whilst sunbathing and since it was felt that the health-risk informationcontained within the health promotion leaflet would be relevant for all recipients.Specifically, the leaflet emphasised the risks of sunbathing and the fact that ‘there is no
such thing as a safe tan’. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that analyses conducted using
current sunscreen use as an additional factor did not alter the pattern of results reportedhere. Furthermore, the interaction between condition and current sunscreen use wasonly significant for one dependent variable, response-efficacy, reflecting the fact that theeffect of condition on this variable was only apparent for those who were not currentlywearing sunscreen.
Negative affect
There was a significant effect of condition on negative affect, F(3, 159) ¼3.07, p< 0.05,
/C17
2
p¼0:05. Games–Howell post hoc tests demonstrated that those in the ‘control’ condition
reported (marginally) lower levels of negative affect when reading the leaflet than those inthe ‘values affirmation’ ( p< 0.05) and ‘positive traits affirmation’ ( p< 0.07) conditions
(Ms 2.98, 4.32 and 4.07, respectively). The planned contrast demonstrated that
participants in the three affirmation conditions reported higher levels of negative affectthan those in the ‘control’ condition, t(105.87) ¼3.30, p/C200.001, d¼0.49.Table 1. Summary of one-way ANOVAs comparing participants in the self-affirmation and control
conditions on indicators of defensive processing and message acceptance.
ControlValues
affirmationKindness
affirmationPositive traits
affirmation
Indicator M(SD) M(SD) M(SD) M(SD) F
Negative affect 2.98 (1.56) 4.32 (2.65) 3.70 (2.09) 4.07 (2.19) 3.07*
Defensive avoidance 4.83 (2.86) 5.05 (2.89) 4.35 (2.98) 5.58 (2.88) 1.23
Message derogation 3.97 (2.11) 3.25 (1.75) 3.17 (1.77) 3.78 (1.82) 1.84Response-efficacy 6.93 (2.19) 8.33 (1.10) 8.00 (1.35) 8.17 (1.32) 6.90***Self-efficacy 6.71 (2.41) 8.43 (0.96) 7.73 (1.27) 7.80 (1.68) 7.62***
Attitude 7.21 (1.91) 8.11 (1.44) 8.26 (0.96) 7.74 (1.72) 3.72*
Intention 6.48 (2.52) 7.30 (2.64) 7.40 (1.89) 7.59 (1.79) 1.95Self-feelings 7.62 (1.58) 6.34 (2.19) 6.80 (2.16) 7.21 (1.82) 3.25*Mood 7.33 (1.69) 6.85 (2.02) 7.35 (1.93) 7.42 (1.88) 0.77
Note: * p< 0.05; *** p< 0.001.538 D.C. Jessop et al.
Defensive avoidance
There was no effect of condition on defensive avoidance of the message, F(3, 159) ¼1.23,
p¼0.30, /C172
p¼0:02 and the planned contrast was not significant, t(159)¼0.31, p¼0.76,
d¼0.01.
Message derogation
There was no effect of condition on message derogation, F(3, 159) ¼1.84, p¼0.14,
/C172
p¼0:03. The planned contrast, however, revealed a marginally significant trend for those
in the three affirmation conditions to report less derogation of the message compared to
those in the ‘control’ condition, t(159)¼/C01.71, p< 0.09, d¼0.31.
Response-efficacy
There was a significant effect of condition on response-efficacy, F(3, 158) ¼6.90,
p< 0.001, /C172
p¼0:12. Games–Howell post hoc tests demonstrated that those in the
‘control’ condition reported lower levels of response-efficacy than those in the ‘valuesaffirmation’ ( p< 0.001), ‘kindness affirmation’ ( p< 0.05), and ‘positive traits affirmation’
(p< 0.01) conditions ( Ms 6.93, 8.33, 8.00 and 8.17, respectively). The planned
contrast demonstrated that participants in the three affirmation conditions reportedhigher levels of response-efficacy than those in the ‘control’ condition, t(49.41) ¼3.44,
p¼0.001, d¼0.80.
Self-efficacy
There was a significant effect of condition on self-efficacy, F(3, 159) ¼7.62, p< 0.001,
/C17
2
p¼0:13. Games–Howell post hoc tests demonstrated that those in the ‘control’ condition
reported (marginally) lower levels of self-efficacy than those in the ‘values affirmation’(p< 0.001), ‘kindness affirmation’ ( p< 0.09) and ‘positive traits affirmation’ ( p< 0.10)
conditions ( Ms 6.71, 8.43, 7.73 and 7.80, respectively). Participants in the ‘values
affirmation’ condition reported higher levels of self-efficacy than those in the ‘kindness
affirmation’ condition ( p< 0.05). The planned contrast demonstrated that participants in
the three affirmation conditions reported higher levels of self-efficacy than those in the‘control’ condition, t(50.15) ¼3.24, p< 0.01, d¼0.76.
Attitude towards using sunscreen
There was a significant effect of condition on attitude, F(3, 159) ¼3.72, p< 0.05,
/C17
2
p¼0:07. Games–Howell post hoc tests demonstrated that those in the ‘control’ condition
reported (marginally) less-positive attitudes towards sunscreen use than those in the
‘kindness affirmation’ ( p< 0.05) and ‘values affirmation’ ( p< 0.08) conditions ( Ms 7.21,
8.26 and 8.11, respectively). The planned contrast demonstrated that participants in thethree affirmation conditions reported more positive attitudes compared to those in the‘control’ condition, t(57.13) ¼2.55, p< 0.05, d¼0.53.
Intention to use sunscreen
There was no effect of condition on intentions to use sunscreen, F(3, 158) ¼1.95, p¼0.12,
/C17
2
p¼0:04. The planned contrast demonstrated, however, that those in the threePsychology and Health 539
affirmation conditions reported higher intentions compared to those in the ‘control’
condition, t(62.46) ¼2.19, p< 0.05, d¼0.42.
Self-feelings
There was a significant effect of condition on self-feelings, F(3, 157) ¼3.25, p< 0.05,
/C172
p¼0:06. Tukey’s HSD post hoc tests demonstrated that those in the ‘control’ condition
reported more positive self-feelings than those in the ‘values affirmation’ condition
(p< 0.05; Ms 7.62 and 6.34, respectively). The planned contrast demonstrated that
participants in the three affirmation conditions reported fewer positive self-feelingscompared to those in the ‘control’ condition, t(157)¼/C02.38, p< 0.05, d¼0.43.
Mood
There was no effect of condition on mood, F(3, 157) ¼0.77, p¼0.51, /C17
2
p¼0:01, and the
planned contrast was not significant, t(157)¼/C00.37, p¼0.71, d¼0.06.
Behaviour: taking a free sample of sunscreen
Chi-square analysis revealed a significant difference between conditions in terms
of whether they indicated that they would like a free sample of sunscreen,/C31
2(3,N¼162)¼7.92, p< 0.05, Cramer’s V¼0.22. As shown in Figure 1, 40.48% of
participants in the ‘control’ condition requested a free sample compared to 63.16% of
participants in the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition, 54.76% of participants in the‘values affirmation’ condition, and 35.00% of participants in the ‘kindness affirmation’condition.
In order to explore further the impact of condition on behaviour, we conducted binary
logistic multiple regression. Because preliminary analysis revealed that the impact of
condition on behaviour was not moderated by current sunscreen use ( p¼0.76), we
conducted one regression analysis for all participants. Condition was dummy coded for0102030405060708090100
Control Positive traits
affirmationValues 
affirmationKindness
affirmationPercentage
Figure 1. Percentage of participants taking a free sample of sunscreen by condition.540 D.C. Jessop et al.
this analysis, such that the first dummy variable ( D1) compared the ‘kindness affirmation’
condition (allocated a value of 1) to the control condition (allocated a value of 0), thesecond dummy variable ( D
2) compared the ‘values affirmation’ condition (1) to the control
condition (0), and the third dummy variable ( D3) compared the ‘positive traits affirmation’
condition (1) to the ‘control’ condition (0). The dependent variable was whether
participants requested a free sample of sunscreen (1) or not (0).
The resultant model significantly predicted whether or not participants requested a free
sample of sunscreen, /C312(3)¼8.01, p< 0.05, with 60.5% of responses correctly classified,
R2
L¼0:04. Inspection of the /C12-weights revealed that D3was the only significant predictor
(/C12¼0.92, p< 0.05), demonstrating that the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition was the
only condition to differ significantly from the ‘control’ condition, with those in the
‘positive traits affirmation’ condition being more likely to request a free sample ofsunscreen. This effect remained significant when we controlled for each of the measures ofdefensive processing and message acceptance in turn, indicating that none of thesemeasures mediated the influence of condition on behaviour.
Discussion
The first aim of the current study was to compare the efficacy of three different affirmation
manipulations. In accordance with self-affirmation theory (Steele, 1988), we hypothesizedthat affirmed participants would be less likely to defensively process and more likely to
accept personally relevant health-risk information about sunbathing and skin cancer
compared to controls. The findings of the current study are highly congruent with thishypothesis, insofar as planned contrasts demonstrated that participants in the threeaffirmation conditions reported more negative affect on reading the information,marginally less derogation of the message, higher levels of response- and self-efficacy,more positive attitudes towards sunscreen use, higher intentions to use sunscreen, and less-
positive self-feeling compared to their counterparts in the control condition.
We additionally predicted that participants in the three affirmation conditions would
be more likely to take a free sample of sunscreen. While condition was found to beassociated with whether or not participants took a free sample of sunscreen, the nature ofthis relationship was contingent on the type of affirmation manipulation. Logistic multipleregression analysis revealed that the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition was the only
affirmation condition to differ significantly from the ‘control’ condition, with participants
in the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition being more likely to request a free sample ofsunscreen than those in the ‘control’ condition.
The fact that the three affirmation manipulations did not uniformly influence
behaviour provides support for the concern voiced by McQueen and Klein (2006) thatresearch is needed to compare the impact of various affirmation manipulations onoutcomes, including behavioural measures. It is not possible to discern from the current
study what it was about the three affirmation manipulations that resulted in their
differential impact on behaviour. The manipulations differed in both content and format.Participants in the ‘values affirmation’ condition were asked to write a short statementabout their most important value. This affirmation was thus ideographic in nature, as itallowed participants to choose the dimension on which they affirmed. Participants in the
‘kindness affirmation’ condition were asked to respond to 10 questions and give examples
of kindness behaviours which they had performed, and participants in the ‘positive traitsaffirmation’ condition were simply asked to indicate whether a number of positive traitsPsychology and Health 541
were descriptive of them. Furthermore, for those in the ‘positive traits affirmation’
condition, the manipulation was integrated into the health promotion leaflet and followedby additional encouragement to take part in the ‘Safety in the Sun 2006 Challenge’. Giventhat the aims of our study were to (i) compare existing affirmation manipulations and(ii) determine whether a brief affirmation manipulation could be integrated into health
promotion materials with positive effect, the use of such varied affirmation manipulations
was a necessary and integral part of our research design. Nonetheless, future research isneeded to identify the key features of such affirmation manipulations that are responsiblefor their success (or otherwise).
One possible reason why the ‘positive traits affirmation’ condition was the only
condition to differ significantly from the ‘control’ condition in terms of its impact onbehaviour is that it potentially affirmed participants on several dimensions, whereas the‘values affirmation’ and ‘kindness affirmation’ conditions most probably each affirmed
participants on one dimension only.
Alternatively, the ‘positive traits affirmation’ task may have represented a more
subtle manipulation than either the ‘values affirmation’ or the ‘kindness affirmation’manipulations in two key respects. First, it was not presented as a separate task but ratherwas integrated into the health promotion leaflet. Second, it presumably did not require thesame level of explicit reflection and processing as was necessitated by the writtenaffirmation tasks. It has been suggested that the subtlety of self-affirmation manipulationsmay represent an important pre-requisite to their success (Sherman and Cohen, 2006).
As noted in the introduction, only one previous published study has clearly
demonstrated the desired effects of a self-affirmation manipulation on a behaviouraloutcome following exposure to personally relevant health-risk information (Shermanet al., 2000, Study 2). The current study thus provides further support for the potentialutility of self-affirmation manipulations in promoting behaviour change.
It is noteworthy that both the above-mentioned Sherman et al. (2000) research and the
current study measured behaviour soon after the self-affirmation manipulation. It is thuspossible that any effects of self-affirmation manipulations on behavioural outcomes may
be fairly short-lived. In addition, as the behavioural measures in these studies involved
performing a behaviour rather than avoiding a behaviour, it is possible that action is moreeasily instigated by self-affirmation manipulations than is desistence from a behaviour.Moreover, while the behaviours of purchasing condoms and requesting free samples ofsunscreen are consistent with the directly health-beneficial behaviours of condom use andsunscreen use, respectively, they do not guarantee that participants actually engaged inthese latter behaviours. Indeed, it is not possible to discount the potential influence ofdemand characteristics in both studies – participants may have been aware that their
behaviour was being assessed and may have adjusted their responses accordingly.
Further research is needed to establish the effects of various self-affirmationmanipulations on behaviours which have direct health-beneficial effects and onlonger-term behavioural outcomes.
The second aim of the current study was to explore whether a simple affirmation
manipulation (viz. the ‘positive trait affirmation’ manipulation) could be successfullyintegrated into the text of a health promotion leaflet. Importantly, the resultsdemonstrated that the ‘positive traits affirmation’ task allowed participants to respond
to the personally relevant health-risk information with less defensive processing and
rendered them more susceptible to persuasion and behaviour change. These findingssuggest that a brief self-affirmation task is amenable to integration into health promotionmaterials with positive effects. Accordingly, manipulations such as the ‘positive traits542 D.C. Jessop et al.
affirmation’ task may prove to be of value in a real-world context. This is the first study to
demonstrate that an integrated affirmation task can be effective at reducing defensiveprocessing and instigating behaviour change. Further research is required to determinewhether the success of this relatively simple intervention can be replicated and generalisedacross different populations and behavioural domains.
Notes
1. Indeed, McQueen and Klein (2006) identified only one published study which directly compared
the effects of different self-affirmation manipulations, and this was in a non-health-related
domain. Specifically, Schimel, Arndt, Banko and Cook (2004) demonstrated intrinsic
self-affirmations to be more effective than extrinsic self-affirmations.
2. We had additionally hypothesised that affirmed participants would be more likely to report
having used sunscreen on exposed skin when sunbathing at two-week follow-up comparedto non-affirmed participants. However, too few participants completed the follow-up
questionnaire to allow this analysis to be conducted; therefore, the Time 2 materials and data
are not described further.
3. Tables summarising bi-variate correlations between the various measures of
defensive processing and the message acceptance by condition are available from the
authors on request.
References
Boney-McCoy, S., Gibbons, F.X., & Gerrard, M. (1999). Self-esteem, compensatory
self-enhancement, and the consideration of health risk. Personality and Social Psychology
Bulletin, 25 , 954–965.
Cancer Research UK (2004). Skin Cancer Research Briefsheet. Retrieved August 10, 2006, from
http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/sunsmart/media/pdffiles/skincancerresearchbriefsheet.pdf.
Freeman, M.A., Hennessy, E.V., & Marzullo, D.M. (2001). Defensive evaluation of antismoking
messages among college-age smokers: The role of possible selves. Health Psychology, 20 ,
424–433.
Harris, P.R., Mayle, K., Mabbott, L., & Napper, L. (2007). Self-affirmation reduces
smokers’ defensiveness to graphic on-pack cigarette warning labels. Health Psychology, 26 ,
437–446.
Harris, P.R., & Napper, L. (2005). Self-affirmation and the biased processing of threatening
health-risk information. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31 , 1250–1263.
Jackson, K.M., & Aiken, L.S. (2000). A psychosocial model of sun protection and sunbathing in
young women: The impact of health beliefs, attitudes, norms and self-efficacy for sun protection.
Health Psychology, 19 , 469–478.
Jackson, K.M., & Aiken, L.S. (2006). Evaluation of a multicomponent appearance based
sun-protective intervention for young women: Uncovering the mechanisms of program efficacy.
Health Psychology, 25 , 34–46.
Keller, P.A. (1999). Converting the unconverted: The effect of inclination and opportunity to
discount health-related fear appeals. Journal of Applied Psychology, 84 , 403–415.
Liberman, A., & Chaiken, S. (1992). Defensive processing of personally relevant health messages.
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 18 , 669–679.
McQueen, A., & Klein, W.M.P. (2006). Experimental manipulations of self-affirmation:
A systematic review. Self and Identity, 5 , 289–354.
Reed, M.B., & Aspinwall, L.G. (1988). Self-affirmation reduces biased processing of health-risk
information. Motivation and Emotion, 22 , 99–132.
Ruiter, R.A.C, Abraham, C., & Kok, G. (2001). Scary warnings and rational precautions: A review
of the psychology of fear appeals. Psychology and Health, 16 , 613–630.Psychology and Health 543
Ruiter, R.A.C., Verplanken, B., Kok, G., & Werrij, M.Q. (2003). The role of coping appraisal in
reactions to fear appeals: Do we need threat information?. Journal of Health Psychology, 8 ,
465–474.
Schimel, J., Arndt, J., Banko, K.M., & Cook, A. (2004). Not all self-affirmations were created equal:
The cognitive and social benefits of affirming the intrinsic (vs. extrinsic) self. Social Cognition,
22, 75–99.
Sherman, D.K., & Cohen, G.L. (2006). The psychology of self-defence: Self-affirmation theory.
In M.P. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 38, pp. 183–242). San
Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Sherman, D.A.K., Nelson, L.D., & Steele, C.M. (2000). Do messages about health risks threaten the
self? Increasing the acceptance of threatening health messages via self-affirmation. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26 , 1046–1058.
Smith, T.W., Orleans, C.T., & Jenkins, C.D. (2004). Prevention and Health promotion: Decades of
progress, new challenges, and an emerging agenda. Health Psychology, 23 , 126–131.
Steele, C.M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: Sustaining the integrity of the self.
In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 21, pp. 261–302).
New York: Academic Press.544 D.C. Jessop et al.
