health psychology report · volume 9(4), 
review article
Oncology nurses are at risk of chronic stress. In this nar-
rative review we provide an overview of stress manage-ment intervention studies for oncology nurses, and sug-gest that Acceptance and Commitment Therapy/Training (ACT) provides a better intervention framework due to the relevance of underpinning therapeutic processes (e.g. ac-ceptance, mindfulness, values clarification) to the role and stress-related experiences of this workforce population. Current evidence for the effectiveness of stress manage-ment intervention varies, with few studies describing how theory informs intervention content, or justifying why they should benefit this population specifically. ACT lends itself to data-driven intervention development, thus po-tentially addressing some methodological limitations in this field. Only one trial has tested ACT in this population, reporting only partial effects. Further empirical research is required given (a) the applicability of ACT for this popu-lation and context, and (b) the associated advantages of brief and/or group delivery to address known barriers to participating in stress management interventions.
key words
oncology nurses; stress management; intervention; ACTWilliam Kent id
Nicholas J. Hulbert-Williams id
Kevin D. Hochard id
A review of stress management interventions  
for the oncology nursing workforce: 
What do we know and what should we be doing 
differently?
organization – Centre for Contextual Behavioural Science, University of Chester, Chester, United Kingdom
authors’ contributions – A: Study design · B: Data collection · C: Statistical analysis · D: Data interpretation · 
E: Manuscript preparation · F: Literature search · G: Funds collection
corresponding author – William Kent, Centre for Contextual Behavioural Science, University of Chester, 
Parkgate Road, Chester CH1 4BJ, United Kingdom, e-mail: w.kent@chester.ac.uk
to cite this article – Kent, W., Hulbert-Williams, N. J., Hochard, K. D. (2021). A review of stress management 
interventions for the oncology nursing workforce: What do we know and what should we be doing differently? 
Health Psychology Report, 9(4), 289–307. https://doi.org/10.5114/hpr.2020.100787
received 16.05.2020 · reviewed 26.08.2020 · accepted 28.09.2020 · published 09.11.2020
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
290 health psychology reportBackground
The oncology setting is a  stressful environment for 
patients, their families, and healthcare professionals (Jones et al., 2013). Oncology care staff include (but are not limited to): oncologists, radiotherapists, so -
cial workers, clinical psychologists, and registered nurses with advanced practice in oncology (oncology nurses). Although each of these groups is at risk of work-related stress (Jones et  al., 2013), this review focuses specifically on oncology nurses. The day-to-day role of oncology nurses varies significantly, from prevention to symptom management, acute care to palliative care, and treatment to rehabilitation (Wyatt & Hulbert-Williams, 2015). Given the diversity of this role, challenging and unpredictable situations occur frequently, often leading to the experience of occupa -
tional stress (Jones et al., 2013).
Important concepts In occupat Ional 
wellbe Ing
‘Occupational stress’ encapsulates various psycho -
logical concepts such as burnout, secondary post-traumatic stress, vicarious traumatisation, and com -
passion fatigue. Burnout and compassion fatigue are most commonly reported in this population and at high prevalence levels (Domagała & Gaworska-Krze -
mińska, 2018; Gomez-Urquiza et al., 2016; De la Fuen -
te-Solana et al., 2020). Burnout results from consistent 
exposure to elevated work-related stress, and is de -
scribed as consisting of three factors: (i) emotional ex -
haustion (i.e. a state of being psychologically drained due to exposure to consistent stress), (ii) depersonali -
sation (i.e. a cynical approach towards the caring role) and (iii) reduced personal accomplishment (i.e. feel -
ing less effective when caring for patients) (Maslach, 1982). Compassion fatigue , or the ‘cost of caring’ 
(Figley, 1995), refers to the reduction of compassion (i.e.  sympathy towards the suffering of others, cre -
ating a desire to help) over time, and an increase in hopelessness with regards to carrying out a  caring role. This is mainly due to caring for and constantly witnessing patients go through life-limiting illnesses and trauma (Joinson, 1992).
High levels of burnout and compassion fatigue 
have been reported globally in this population (Cheng et al., 2015; Hooper et al., 2010; Potter et al., 2010; Sherman et  al., 2006). Out of 153 oncology nurses in Potter et  al.’s study (2010), 37% of inpa -
tient staff reported experiences of compassion fa -
tigue, and 44% reported high levels of burnout. Emo -
tional exhaustion was high in Kutluturkan et  al.’s (2016) sample of 140 oncology nurses, and, similarly, in a  third of Guveli et  al.’s (2015) Turkish sample (n = 159). A study of 216 American hospice nurses 
reported that around 80% of the sample were at high risk of compassion fatigue (Abendroth &  Flannery, 
2006). Oncology nurses have reported higher lev -
els of burnout and compassion fatigue compared to 
other specialties such as emergency, intensive care, and nephrology nurses (Hooper et al., 2010; Ortega-Campos et al., 2020).
what are the causes and consequences 
of burnout and compass Ion fat Igue  
for th Is workforce?
Barnard and colleagues (2006) list 50 stressors spe-
cific to the oncology setting, with a prevalence rate of 
over 50% within their sample of 101 oncology nurses. Significant positive correlations were found between 
those stressors and both emotional exhaustion and 
depersonalisation scores. High workload/caseload 
(Sherman et al., 2006; Wazqar, 2019), low job autono-
my (Escot et al., 2001), emotional demands of patients and their families (Isikhan et al., 2004; Wazqar, 2019), constantly dealing with illness and death (Ekedahl & Wengström, 2007; Florio et al., 1998), and difficult communication with patients (Corner, 2002) all serve to increase oncology nurse stress. These are further exacerbated by the pressures stemming from the cur-rent coronavirus pandemic (Abratt, 2020). Recurrent experiences of these stressors further increase risks 
of burnout and/or compassion fatigue (Alacacioglu 
et al., 2009; Barnard et al., 2006; Corso, 2012). 
Aware of these issues, oncology nurses have de-
vised various coping strategies such as peer support, relaxation methods, personal/group reflection ses-sions, and positive personal/professional relation-ships (Florio et al., 1998; Huock, 2014; Wenzel et al., 2011). As with many groups of highly stressed peo-ple, certain coping methods can be more damaging to health. The use of alcohol and other substances to re-duce stress has been reported in this population (Wal-lace et  al., 2009), which have negative implications for work productivity and the individual’s physical and psychological health. Other problematic conse-quences can include increased absenteeism (van Mol 
et al., 2015), and in many cases, highly stressed staff  
leaving their job prematurely (Bourdeanu et al., 2020; Wells-English et  al., 2019), further increasing the problematic nurse shortage (Barrett &  Yates, 2002). Consequently, staff shortages have a knock-on effect on job satisfaction and burnout in oncology nurses (Toh et al., 2011).
Support packages and interventions to reduce 
stress are essential to good organisational function-ing, but previous work suggests that oncology nurses are not provided with sufficient opportunities to par-
ticipate in these, especially for compassion fatigue 
(Aycock & Boyle, 2009). Occupational health settings 
are increasingly emphasising preventive initiatives 
in the workplace. In the UK context, for example, 
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
291 volume 9(4), there has been promotion of psychological health in 
National Health Service (NHS) staff in recent years 
(Boorman, 2009). Efforts to better understand predic-tors and experiences of chronic stress in oncology nurses are vital to this effort, as they can negatively impact on the standard and safety of patient care (Kumar & Bhalla, 2019; Zadeh et al., 2012). 
Within the occupational stress literature, inter-
vention packages can be categorised based on wheth-
er they are person-specific or organisational in na-
ture (Reynolds, 2000). Person-specific interventions 
address those stressors specific to the individual, and the coping strategies used to combat these. Organi-
sational packages target different aspects of work 
structure, such as teamwork, managerial responsi-bilities, caseload distribution, health and safety, and promotion of work-life balance.
A previous review of stress management interven -
tions for general nursing samples (Mimura & Griffiths, 2003) identified that few intervention programmes are based on theoretically derived models or developed in response to specific stressors faced by nurses. They emphasise that future research should provide con -
ceptual clarity about how and why interventions are developed. This is an important context in consider -
ing our review of the interventions which follow. To our knowledge, there is currently no detailed review of oncology nurse stress management interventions: we propose that such a review is especially important if we are to develop effective, theoretically driven in -
terventions for this population. In undertaking such a review, we aim particularly to explore how Accep -
tance and Commitment Therapy/Training (ACT) may be a viable theoretical framework – as an alternative to the existing evidence base – given its conceptual fit and broader evidence base.
review methods
We undertook a narrative review of stress manage -
ment intervention research in oncology nurses pub -
lished over the past 15 years. Criteria for article inclu -
sion stipulated that the work had to be: (i) empirically based (i.e. testing the effectiveness of an intervention), 
(ii) inclusive of a target sample of oncology nurses, 
and (iii) in the context specifically of occupational 
stress management outcomes. Nine empirical stud -
ies were thus identified. These studies were organised and discussed according to the type of intervention 
(i.e. educational or psychotherapeutic). Despite the prevalence of stress, surprisingly, few intervention studies have been recently published. 
The second half of this paper offers a narrative re-
view of the ACT framework and its potential utility for oncology nurse stress management. Additional 
literature on the use of ACT in different populations is provided to supplement this work.interventions targeted  
at improving oncology nurse 
stress management
Using Reynold’s (2000) dichotomy, published studies 
in the oncology nursing setting appear to use per-son-specific approaches (e.g. educational workshops, team-based development programmes, and psycho-therapeutic approaches), typically in group-format delivery. This is likely due to the feasibility and cost efficiency of person-specific packages over organisa-tional approaches, of which the latter generally re-quire more resources and changes to infrastructure (Reynolds, 2000).
Intervent Ion effect Iveness: what does 
the current ev Idence demonstrate?
Table 1 provides the key details from the studies in-vestigating stress management interventions for on-cology nurses. Onan et al. (2013) and Udo et al. (2013) both tested group-based educational interventions, reporting improvements in work-related stress levels, with Onan et al.’s (2013) participants also reporting significantly improved levels of emotional exhaus-tion after training. Only the effects on work-related stress were maintained to one-month follow-up, but unfortunately no control condition was included for comparison in Onan et al.’s (2013) study design. For Udo et al.’s (2013) findings, the decreased stress levels were related to workload and less feeling of disap-pointment at work, but the effects were not statis-tically significant. Le Blanc et al. (2007) and Kravits et al. (2010) also used education-based interventions to target reduction in emotional exhaustion and de-personalisation. Both studies reported significant improvements in both outcomes, but only Le Blanc et al.’s (2007) study reports medium to high effects on emotional exhaustion being maintained at 6-month follow-up. Further, out of the education-based in-terventions in this review, only Le Blanc and col-leagues (2007) include a wait-list control condition, 
allowing for their findings to account for regression 
to the mean and potential confounding variables. Kravits et al. (2010) do not provide an interpretation of the strength of the effect sizes, and neither study includes process measures to examine whether their chosen intervention content is responsible for the re-ported changes in outcome scores. There were also post-intervention reports of reduced personal ac-complishment in Kravits et al.’s (2010) study, which is surprising given that they improved scores of emotional exhaustion and depersonalisation. The au-thors note that this may be due to participants feel-ing more comfortable reporting their true feelings of personal accomplishment after the intervention, 
leading to the observation of lower scores, though 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
292 health psychology report
Table 1
Intervention studies investigating stress management for oncology nurses 
Author 
(year)Country Design Participants;
sample size ( n)Intervention  
informationControl group 
(YES/NO)Assessment information  
(including time frames)Effect size  
interpretation
Onan et al. (2013)Turkey Quasi-experi -
mentOncology 
nurses; n = 30Coping skills interven -
tion; nine 90-minute 
sessionsNO Outcomes: stress, ways of 
coping, and burnout. (Pre- and 
post-intervention, 1-month 
follow-up)Not reported
Udo et al. (2013)Sweden Mixed-methods 
quasi-experi -
ment Oncology 
nurses; n = 42Educational interven -
tion on existential 
issues; five 90-minute 
sessionsYES – non-edu -
cational groupOutcomes: Attitudes towards 
caring for patients feeling 
meaningless scale, sense of 
coherence scale. (Post-interven -
tion and 6-month follow-up)Not reported
Le Blanc et al. (2007)Nether -
landsLongitudinal 
quasi-experi -
mentPhysicians, on -
cology nurses, 
radiotherapy 
assistants;  
n = 664Team-based burnout 
programme target -
ing various concepts 
(e.g. decision making, 
social support, problem 
solving); six monthly 
3-hour sessionsYES – received 
no intervention 
at allOutcomes: Burnout (emotional 
exhaustion and depersonali -
sation), social support, deci -
sion making participation, job 
control, job demands. (Pre- and 
post-intervention, 6-month 
follow-up)Small negative rela -
tionships ( B = –.06 
to –.18) between all 
outcomes, apart from 
a medium to strong 
positive association 
between workload and 
emotional exhaustion
Kravits et al. (2010)USA Mixed-methods Oncology 
nurses; n = 248One 6-hour psycho-
educational pro -
gramme on self-care 
strategiesNO Outcomes: burnout, Draw-a-
Person-in-the-Rain Art Assess -
ment (PIR) to measure inter -
action between stressors and 
coping resources to augment 
burnout scores. (Pre- and post-
intervention)Not reported
Potter et al. (2013)USA Descriptive 
pilot studyOncology 
nurses; n = 14Compassion fatigue 
resiliency programme; 
four 90-minute ses -
sionsNO Outcomes: Burnout, compas -
sion fatigue, impact of events, 
nursing job satisfaction. (Pre- 
and post-intervention, 3 and 
6-month follow-ups)Not reported
(Table 1 continues)
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
293 volume 9(4), Table 1
(Table 1 continued) 
Author 
(year)Country Design Participants;
sample size ( n)Intervention  
informationControl group 
(YES/NO)Assessment information  
(including time frames)Effect size  
interpretation
Cohen-Katz et al. (2005)USA Randomised-
controlled trialOncology 
nurses; n = 27Mindfulness Based 
Stress Reduction; 
eight weekly 2.5-hour 
sessions YES – waitlist 
conditionOutcomes: Burnout, emotional 
exhaustion, psychological dis -
tress. Process measure: Mind -
fulness Attention Awareness 
Scale. (Pre- and post-interven -
tion, 3-month follow-up)Not reported
Duarte and Pinto-Gouveia (2016)Portugal Non-ran -
domised con -
trolled studyOncology 
nurses; n = 48Mindfulness Based 
Stress Reduction; six 
weekly 2-hour group 
sessionsYES – waitlist 
conditionOutcomes: Professional quality 
of life; depression, anxiety and 
stress; self-compassion. Pro -
cess measures: psychological 
inflexibility and mindfulness. 
(Pre- and post-intervention, no 
follow-up) Medium to large ef -
fects ( d values not pre -
sented in the paper) 
on stress, burnout and 
compassion fatigue
Villani et al. (2013)Italy Randomised-
controlled trialOncology 
nurses; n = 30Stress Inoculation 
Training (SIT) through 
mobile phone applica -
tion; 8 sessions over 
4 weeksYES – neutral 
video clips, pre -
senting natural 
landscapes, with -
out any narrativeOutcomes: stress, anxiety, 
coping and job content. (Pre- 
and post measures after each 
session) Not reported
Poulsen et al. (2015)USA Randomised-
controlled trialRadiation 
therapists 
and oncology 
nurses; n = 70One-day educational 
workshop on recov -
ery-related self-care 
practicesYES – written-
educational 
information onlyOutcomes: recovery, satisfac -
tion with self-care practices, 
perceived sleep quality. (Pre-
intervention, then every week 
for a 6-week period)Medium significant 
effects ( d = .72 to .77) 
observed for all 
outcomes at six-week 
follow-up
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
294 health psychology reportno supporting data (e.g. qualitative feedback) are pre-
sented to corroborate this claim. Compassion fatigue 
and burnout were the focus of Potter et al.’s (2013) re-
search. Although scores in these outcomes improved 
after the intervention, and were further reduced at 
six-month follow-up, only compassion fatigue scores showed a significant improvement from baseline to 
six-month follow-up. No effect on burnout was ob-
served at any time-point. 
Taking a more psychotherapeutic stance, Cohen-
Katz et al. (2005) tested a mindfulness-based stress-reduction intervention (MBSR), reporting signifi-
cantly improved emotional exhaustion which was 
maintained at the three-month follow-up. However, 
no significant improvement in depersonalisation was 
reported, implying that MBSR has limited effects on this sub-construct within burnout. The clinical utility 
of the findings is also limited due to no effect sizes 
being reported in the study. Duarte and Pinto-Gou-
veia (2016) also tested MBSR and reported post-in-
tervention effects on stress, burnout and compassion fatigue; the effects were medium to large, but no lon-
ger-term follow-up was included in the study design. 
This can make one question the applied relevance of 
these findings (e.g. providing an arguably lengthy in-
tervention to time-limited nurses) due to the lack of indication for maintenance. Interestingly, however, 
Duarte and Pinto-Gouveia (2017) did later report that 
improvements in stress, burnout and compassion fa-tigue were statistically mediated by changes in psy-
chological inflexibility; we will come to the relevance 
of this finding shortly. 
Villani et  al. (2013) successfully improved anxi -
ety levels and coping skills through a mobile phone delivered Stress-Inoculation Training intervention. 
Scores were not assessed at follow-up, but pre-to-post 
intervention scores were statistically significantly im -
proved compared to control participants. This study did not, however, include an explicit outcome measure of stress, which seems a curious design choice given 
the focus of this work. Poulsen et al. ’s (2015) study also 
lacks an explicit stress outcome measure(s); however, 
significant improvements were observed in recovery 
experiences (relating to relaxation, self-control, psy -
chological detachment and mastery), satisfaction with 
general self-care practices (presumedly physical and 
psychological self-care, though this is not clear), and 
perceived sleep quality. Medium effect sizes across all 
outcomes were maintained at six-week follow-up. The applied relevance of these findings to oncology nurse 
stress management specifically is, however, limited 
due to the selection of proxy outcomes.
In summary, the intervention studies described 
above and in Table 1 have reported varied findings across a range of outcomes, but the overall picture is 
not an entirely clear or conclusive one. Three out of 
the nine studies did not include measures that target important stress-related concepts (e.g. burnout and compassion fatigue), and so their applied relevance 
to stress management remains somewhat ambigu-
ous. From this sample of studies, psychotherapeutic interventions seem to produce the most promising results, and they are also methodologically stronger given that: (i) all of them include control groups in their design; (ii) interpretation of effect sizes is more frequently reported (2 out of the 4 studies presented effect sizes); (iii) none of the studies testing psycho-
therapeutic interventions report negative effects 
(e.g. the reduced personal accomplishment scores 
observed in Kravits et al.’s (2010) educational inter-vention); and (iv), they generally include process 
measures to determine whether the intervention is 
performed as intended, allowing us to probe for the mechanisms leading to change in primary outcomes. This final point is particularly important in inter-vention research, especially in the current zeitgeist of process-based interventions (Hofmann &  Hayes, 2018). However, even in those cases where improve-ments are observed, the lack of follow-up in three out of nine studies (e.g. Duarte &  Pinto-Gouveia, 2016; Villani et al., 2013) often renders us unable to 
conclude whether the reported salutary effects last 
beyond the intervention sessions. 
why act  mIght be a helpful alternat Ive
We were not surprised to find a  small number of mindfulness-based intervention studies given that these have also been widely used for stress manage-ment in non-oncology nursing populations (Craigie et al., 2016; Delaney, 2018; Foureur et al., 2013; Lomas et al., 2018; Mackenzie et al., 2006; Watanabe et al., 2019). However, previous research has shown that mindfulness-based interventions may have limited long-term effectiveness for stress management in general populations, and in some instances are equal-ly as effective as other approaches such as relaxation programmes (Chiesa & Serretti, 2009). An approach 
which builds on this limited effectiveness base, with 
the addition of other therapeutic processes as part of a broader intervention framework, might, therefore, be a wise starting point. For example, creating a drive to want to manage stress via the appetitive function of values-based processes (e.g. clarifying the impor-tance of self-care as a motivator to engage in stress management behaviours), as seen in ACT (Hayes et  al., 2011), may function to promote longevity of 
the intervention effect by increasing engagement 
in stress management skills (such as mindfulness) 
in the long term. Mindfulness-based skills may pro-
duce short-term benefits, but commitment to values 
could make participants feel more inclined to engage 
with the skills beyond the training – a hallmark of 
long-term behavioural change. The appetitive nature 
of values selected by clients make them intrinsi-
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
295 volume 9(4), cally rewarding; thus engaging in values-congruent 
behaviours (e.g. self-care) would be reinforced and, 
over time, become more fluent (Luoma & Platt, 2015). 
Values-based processes are not targeted in traditional 
MBSR, thus justifying the use of more complex, theo-
retically grounded, intervention approaches. 
ACT, being one such framework, is informed by 
Relational Frame Theory (Hayes et  al., 2001), thus having a strong evidence base for including specific 
intervention components. ACT explores how verbal 
(thought) content and cognitions can maintain an in-dividual’s negative behaviour and thoughts. ACT has 
been investigated across many different contexts, in-
cluding (but not limited to) therapy for psychopathol-
ogy (Powers et al., 2009; Ruiz, 2010), interventions for 
health behaviour change (Forman et  al., 2009; Hef-fner et  al., 2003; Hernández-López et  al., 2009; Lil-
lis et al., 2009) and, specific to this review, for stress 
in the workplace setting (Dahl et al., 2004; Flaxman 
& Bond, 2010b). Although ACT has been promoted 
as suitable for use in the cancer setting (Hulbert-Wil-liams et al., 2015), its application typically focuses on 
patients rather than care staff.
ACT aims to promote psychological flexibility, 
i.e. the ability to fully contact the present moment, 
and the thoughts, feelings and emotions it contains in a  non-judgemental manner, and to continue or 
alter behaviour in pursuit of values-based living 
(Hayes et al., 2011). Psychological flexibility is widely identified as crucial in the maintenance of healthy 
psychological wellbeing, especially within a  work 
context (Lloyd et al., 2013; Puolakanaho et al., 2020). 
It is a means to overcome the detrimental effects of 
experiential avoidance – the attempt to avoid nega-tive private events (e.g. feelings, emotions, thoughts 
etc.), even when doing so can lead to behavioural 
complications in the long run (Hayes et al., 2011). Ex-
periential avoidance is argued to both increase and 
maintain psychological distress, and negatively in-fluence effective behavioural activation (i.e. engage-
ment in activities which improve mood) (Kashdan 
et al., 2006).
Experiential avoidance is identified as a risk fac-
tor within the workplace and should be targeted in preventive interventions (Bond & Donaldso-Feilder, 
2004). Significant medium positive correlations have 
been found between experiential avoidance and de-
personalisation and emotional exhaustion in Spanish 
critical care nurses (Iglesias et  al., 2010), and post-traumatic stress symptoms in palliative care staff  
(O’Mahony et  al., 2015). The Experiential Avoid-
ance in Caregiving Questionnaire (Losada et  al., 
2014) illustrates the awareness of this concept in the 
healthcare field. ACT is, therefore, recommended as a promising preventive strategy (Biglan et al., 2008), 
since the promotion of psychological flexibility is the 
key outcome. Nonetheless, ACT is not currently be-ing widely used as a  stress management approach in oncology caregiving populations. In our scop-
ing searches, we identified only one intervention 
study that tested ACT for oncology nurses. Habibian 
et al. (2018) delivered a group-based ACT interven-
tion (four 1.5-hour sessions) to 60 paediatric oncol-
ogy nurses and special disease nurses (intervention condition, n = 30; control group, n = 30) using a ran-
domised controlled trial (RCT) design. The control group received ‘communication skills’ that were un-
related to ACT, but no further details on this con-
tent were provided. Significant improvements were found in job stress scores compared to controls, with 
these large effects being maintained at three-month 
follow-up. However, no significant improvements 
in burnout were found for either condition after the 
intervention. Surprisingly, no process measure was included, making it impossible to determine whether 
the theorised intervention processes had a causal ef-
fect on the observed improvements in stress.
ACT can be presented visually using the ‘Hexaf-
lex’ model (Figure 1). To briefly summarise, six core processes are theoretically linked to one another with 
the aim of promoting psychological flexibility (Hayes 
et  al., 2011). It is important to note that each core 
process is considered a  positive psychological skill 
– a technique aimed at helping participants engage with both positive and negative internal content to 
promote mental wellbeing – and not merely a meth-
od to avoid or reduce symptoms of psychopathology. 
Cognitive defusion is defined as a  process which 
allows an individual to create a  context in which their present thoughts and feelings do not excessive-
ly regulate their actions or behaviour (Hayes et al., 
2011). In a ‘defused’ state, goals and values can exert more control over behaviour, compared to a ‘fused’ 
state where emotional content exerts control over 
behavioural activation. For example, a  nurse could 
narrate the different thoughts that flow through 
their mind after a difficult patient experience in or-der to create some ‘psychological distance’ between 
themselves and the thoughts. Self-as-context is an 
awareness of one’s own experiences (past and pres-ent) without attachment to them – in a way, defusion 
applied to self-concept. This allows an individual to understand their role as an observer to thoughts and 
emotions, rather than allowing these experiences to 
contain them and define their self-concept (Hayes 
et al., 2011). One might use the ‘Classroom metaphor’ 
(Stoddard &  Afari, 2014) to illustrate this, whereby the school classroom is the container of our different 
positive and negative internal content (depicted as 
pleasant and ill-disciplined students), as well as the 
critical or praising approach we have towards that 
content (i.e. the ‘teacher’ role). The classroom is the perspective we can take in self-as-context, whereby 
we are simply the vessel in which those experiences 
occur, allowing one to observe experiences without judgment. 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
296 health psychology reportexperienced in this non-judgemental manner (Hayes 
et al., 2011). In oncology nursing, this might involve being open to and exploring not just the patient’s dis -
tress regarding illness or death, but also noticing the distress that they themselves can experience. 
Values are defined as “ongoing patterns of activ-
ity that are actively constructed, dynamic, and evolv-ing” (Wilson et al., 2010, p. 252) that individuals can work towards, and which may facilitate goal setting. A common shared value for oncology nurses might be ‘compassion’, which provides an overarching pur-pose to the patient care they provide. At the technical level, values are verbally constructed ‘rules’ that mo-tivate an individual to act in a way that is meaningful to them and are especially important in supporting continued action (rather than avoidance) in the state of psychological suffering. In a related psychological process, where an individual makes choices (day-to-day or larger life goals) in a way that is congruent with their personal values, they are more likely to recognise that their lives have ‘meaning’ (Plumb et  al., 2009). After an individual clarifies values for different areas of their life, the final component of ACT is to train skills which encourage a client to pur-sue or ‘commit’ to specific actions (e.g. clearly com-municating empathy in the presence of a distressed patient) that will help bring those values to life – a process called committed action. Contact with the present moment  through mindful -
ness training is central to ACT. Mindfulness is a pro -
cess of purposely paying attention to the present mo -
ment (e.g. what a  person can see, hear, touch, etc.), including to those aspects of the human experience – thoughts, emotions and so forth. Often when we are feeling stressed, our cognitive attention is focused more on future worries or rumination over past ex -
periences; our emotional state is tied to that worry in a subjectively appraised way that might bring distress -
ing feelings of guilt or self-blame. Mindfulness train -
ing offers the ability to know  when their conscious 
attention is not focused on present-moment experi -
ences, and tools to then return it to that state of be -
ing in a non-judgmental manner (Kabat-Zinn, 1990). In ACT, mindfulness is a  crucial skill to then allow for the training of an Accepting mindset . Often defined 
as the opposite of experiential avoidance, this state of being is where we train clients to be fully accepting of present moment experiences, even when these might not be desirable. Mindfulness can often feel very easy when the content of the present moment is pleas -
ant and desirable, but when internal content is more personally challenging, there is an increased drive towards experiential avoidance. Acceptance training offers techniques to appreciate that distressing psy -
chological content is just as important to the human experience and should equally be approached and 
Self as contextBeing present Commitment & Behaviour change 
processes
Committed 
actionCognitive
defusionDefinig  
valued  
directionsAcceptance
 Mindfulness and Acceptance processes Psychological  
flexibilityFigure 1
Acceptance and Commitment Therapy, illustrated using the Hexaflex model (adapted from Hulbert-Williams et al., 
2015).
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
297 volume 9(4), psycholog Ical flex IbIlIty and Its 
relevance to the oncology nurs Ing 
sett Ing
Richardson et al. (2015) demonstrated the empirical 
link between cognitive fusion and self-compassion 
in USA-based medical students (n = 52): a significant 
medium negative correlation was reported between 
cognitive fusion and self-compassion. By promot-
ing cognitive defusion, therefore, ACT interventions 
have the potential to increase self-compassion, which 
is known to improve psychological health (Neff et al., 
2007), and has relevance to healthcare settings by im-
proving standards of patient care (Wiklund Gustin 
&  Wagner, 2013). In a  similar, UK-based cross-sec-
tional study, cognitive defusion negatively correlated 
with perceived stress, burnout and compassion fa-
tigue, with moderate-to-strong effects, in a  sample 
of 142 National Health Service-based nurses (Kent 
et al., 2019). Furthermore, all of the ACT processes 
together accounted for large proportions of variance 
in perceived stress, burnout, compassion fatigue and compassion satisfaction (R
2 range  =  .36-.61), above 
and beyond that explained by demographic or work-
related variables (e.g. relationship status or years or 
experience). Acceptance, mindfulness and values-
based processes were frequent independent contribu-
tors to the variance explained in these chronic stress 
outcomes, highlighting their importance in nurse-
focused stress management interventions. Self-as-
context was also significantly predictive of lower 
perceived stress, but was not a significant predictor 
for burnout or compassion fatigue. Despite this, self-
as-context may still be an important stress manage-
ment component; for example, nurses who are fused 
with a self-as-content narrative that they should be 
able to cope with stress because they are caring and compassionate people (for others) may be more at 
risk of suffering the negative effects of stress. Fusion 
with this self-content may consequently lead to mi-
nimisation of the stress experience or a reluctance to 
seek help, which, in the long term, may elevate risks for chronic stress. Cognitive defusion techniques 
may help by providing separation between this self-
as-nurse narrative, and the experiencing self in the 
present moment (i.e. noticing thoughts and feelings 
as a conscious stream of events and being guided by 
one’s values). It is worth noting that relationships 
between therapeutic process predictors and these 
various outcomes likely have a  temporal element: 
addressing levels of perceived stress first may in turn 
help to reduce risks of developing burnout and com-
passion fatigue, though this requires longitudinal in-
vestigation. 
Acceptance has been reviewed in relation to cop-
ing strengths in informal caregivers of patients with 
terminal illness and dealing with bereavement (Davis et al., 2015): two issues relevant to the oncology set-ting. Davis and colleagues (2015) proposed an ACT-
based model for volunteer caregivers specifically aimed at acceptance of unwanted thoughts/feelings 
associated with grief and fear of death, and address-
ing communication difficulties. Volunteer caregivers have been found to report similar stressors to em-
ployed oncology nurses (Hulbert & Morrison, 2006); 
thus these ideas have applications to this population. 
Acceptance skills could help oncology nurses to en-
gage in effective care and communication, even in the presence of their own and patients’ suffering (da 
Fonte Sousa Gomes et al., 2013). Where acceptance is 
lacking, nurses may instead avoid present-moment experiences of the more distressing parts of their job 
in the misguided assumption that this will reduce 
its vicarious effects. Given that this is a known risk 
factor for compassion fatigue development (Figley, 
1995), intervention strategies that overcome this kind of experiential avoidance are hugely important.
Various research supports mindfulness as an ef-
fective component in nurse stress management (Ba-
zarko et al., 2013; Mackenzie et al., 2006). Cohen-Katz 
et al.’s (2005) and Duarte and Pinto-Gouveia’s (2016) studies reviewed previously demonstrate the utility 
of mindfulness for oncology nurses. Comparative-
ly, a  mindfulness-based intervention incorporating 
values-clarification exercises has been investigated 
for burnout, depression and post-traumatic stress in USA-based palliative care professionals (n  =  17; 
Gerhart et  al., 2016). Significant reductions were 
found for depressive symptoms and depersonalisa-
tion, demonstrating large effect sizes, but no control 
group was included for comparison, and no follow-up was implemented to explore the maintenance 
of effect. Importantly, however, significant reduc-
tions in cognitive fusion and experiential avoidance 
were also present, providing tentative evidence for 
these processes as potential mechanisms of change. The importance of compassion identity in oncology 
nurses (i.e. evaluating internal coping resources for 
the stress of caring for the chronically ill and dy-ing; Corso, 2012) has been examined with regards 
to mindfulness. From an ACT perspective, we might 
define this as using mindfulness skills to defuse from 
both fixed coping methods and a fused self-identity 
to develop self-as-context. Corso (2012) identifies mindfulness as crucial to oncology nurses’ role, as 
they require constant self-awareness and monitoring 
of their compassion identity. By freeing up an oncol-
ogy nurse from ‘fusion’ and allowing development of 
this compassion identity, not only may stress be re-duced, but it may also allow an oncology nurse to at-
tend to each patient’s unique needs more effectively, 
improving the standard of care provided (Raab, 2014).
Cross-sectional research with Chinese oncol-
ogy nurses indicated that perceptions of a  nurses’ role being important and valuable is related to im-
proved job satisfaction and lower scores of burnout 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
298 health psychology report(Cheng et al., 2015). This observation may be ampli-
fied through deliberate use of values clarification 
in intervention studies. Raingruber and Wolf (2015) 
assessed the unique role of oncology nursing, iden-
tifying three main themes involved in sustaining 
these health carers: (i) importance of vulnerability and thankfulness in patients, (ii) feeling of being 
spirituality associated with oncology nursing prac-
tice, and (iii) the value of being in the moment and 
recognising priorities as meaningful aspects of on-
cology nursing. These themes naturally align with an ACT-informed definition of values. A similar finding 
was reported by Van Rooyen et al. (2008): oncology 
nurses and their patient(s) were found to develop 
a special connectedness, requiring them to approach 
both death and illness directly. Doing this effectively requires the nurses to engage with this psychologi-
cally challenging content, and in doing so, might 
require reflection on their own values, meaning and 
purpose. Although often done for patient benefit, this 
psychological work might also benefit the oncology nurse by providing an additional stress management 
coping mechanism (Van Rooyen et al., 2008). 
ACT may, therefore, be even more suited to ad-
dressing chronic stress in oncology nurses com-
pared to other purely mindfulness-based approaches (e.g. MBSR or Mindfulness-Based Cognitive Therapy) 
because of its added emphasis on values-driven be-
haviour. Values enable an individual to endure stress and other sources of psychological suffering (Bond 
et al., 2006), and so present a pertinent intervention 
target. In preventing compassion fatigue in oncol-
ogy nurses, Corso (2012) suggests that interventions 
should train participants to “pay attention to the people and activities that nurture your mind, body 
and spirit. Commit to making time to increase those 
interactions or activities” (Corso, 2012, p. 449). Corso 
is not writing from a pro-ACT perspective, but the 
links between this quote and the committed action component within ACT are clear.
Based on this literature, we suggest that the core 
features of the ACT model make it highly relevant 
to the context and nature of the oncology nursing 
environment. Burnout prevention approaches which focus on the relationship between the individual and 
the situational stressor have long been considered as 
most effective (Maslach & Goldberg, 1998). ACT does 
so by modifying how an individual relates to their 
environment and experiences, rather than attempt-ing to change or reduce the stressor. This is an impor-
tant outcome goal given that the frequent stressors 
reported by this group are often not changeable; it 
thus makes sense to instead intervene on how one 
responds to (a) the presence and (b) the non-change-ability of those stimuli (Blackedge &  Hayes, 2001). 
This reconceptualization of stress appraisal offers 
a  more workable approach compared to an ‘avoid-ant’ stance to dealing with stressful situations (Butts &  Gutierrez, 2018), which are, in most cases, un-
avoidable as part of the job.
ACT implements a ‘unified model’ (Hayes et al., 
2011), in that all of the components theoretically 
interact to increase psychological flexibility. Conse-quently, ACT protocols are likely more participant-friendly as each exercise or session naturally leads on to the other (e.g. the importance of firstly adopting an open and accepting approach to internal content 
in order to more effectively focus on the present mo-
ment; Flaxman et al., 2013). This allows for a more 
comprehensive understanding of the different stress management skills which may help to avoid partici-
pant attrition (Richardson &  Rothstein, 2008). En-
couragingly, and perhaps consequently, a meta-anal-ysis published last year reported that dropout rates were lower for ACT interventions (17.35%) compared to comparison conditions (18.62%) (Karekla et  al., 2019). ACT has been widely developed in group and/or brief format (Strosahl et  al., 2012), for example, web-based interventions, and 1-2 hour workshops. This could be a suitable solution for oncology nurses who regularly face barriers to research participation, 
such as workload (Roxburgh, 2006). ACT is amena-
ble to delivery through coaching (e.g. skills training rather than ‘therapy’; Hulbert-Williams et al., 2016), which may make participation in interventions more acceptable and less stigmatising. Furthermore, there is now an abundance of process measures that allow for evaluation of the different components within in-tervention studies; of all available theoretical frame-works for psychological interventions, this model thus lends itself to a greater extent to high quality designs incorporating mediation and process model-ling of intervention components. Examples include the work-related Acceptance and Action Question-naire (Bond et  al., 2013) to measure psychological flexibility in a  work context, or the Valued-Living 
Questionnaire (Wilson et  al., 2010) to measure the 
values component. 
act  Intervent Ions for employee 
wellbe Ing In non-oncology 
healthcare sett Ings
That there was only one study on ACT for oncol-ogy nurses surprised us. However, a  further ratio-nale for the use of this framework can be found in the evidence in other organisational contexts (Bond 
& Bunce, 2000; Flaxman & Bond, 2010a, 2010b). Re-
search in the healthcare professional setting is still 
limited, though there are relevant studies testing 
benefits for various groups in the caring profes-
sions. For example, using an observational design, 
Pakenham (2015) investigated cross-sectional corre-
lations between ACT processes (values, acceptance, 
mindfulness, thought suppression) and adjustment 
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
299 volume 9(4), outcomes (e.g. stress and psychological distress) in 
clinical psychology trainees (n = 116): higher scores 
on acceptance and values measures, and lower scores 
on thought suppression, were each related to lower 
work-related stress (small effects) and psychological 
distress (small effects). 
Two RCTs of ACT with qualified (O’Brien et al., 
2019) and student nursing samples (Frögéli et  al., 2015) reported significant reductions in mental 
health symptoms (medium effects), perceived stress 
(large effects), and burnout (large effects) when com-pared to both wait-list and treatment-as-usual con-
trols. The lengthy follow-up in Frögéli et al.’s study 
(2015) allowed them to further demonstrate that im-
provements in perceived stress at one-year follow-up 
were significantly mediated by change in experien-tial avoidance during the intervention (i.e. from base-
line to the end of the sixth session), indicating that 
the effects lasted well beyond the training sessions 
(Frögéli et al., 2019). O’Brien et al. (2019) found that 
their nurses reported significantly fewer days (medi-um effect size) missed due to injury (e.g. musculosk-
eletal complaints), implying that ACT has potential 
positive implications for both the psychological and 
physical health of nurses. 
Brinkborg et al.’s (2011) ACT RCT with 106 Swed-
ish social workers found that, compared with wait-list controls, a  significant difference was found in 
those participants who presented high stress at base-line (> 25 on the Perceived Stress Scale), with 42% of 
the intervention condition showing clinically signifi-
cant post-treatment change (i.e. classified as ‘recov-
ered’ and defined using a cut-off point supplemented 
by Swedish norm data on stress levels), compared to only 11.5% of the control group. This was coupled 
with statistically significant improvements in burn-
out and general mental health. Similarly, McCo-
nachie et al.’s (2014) study with intellectual disabil-
ity support staff found significantly reduced distress (medium-to-large effects) and thought suppression 
(medium effects) in their ACT intervention partici-
pants compared to wait-list controls, with more pro-
nounced effects being observed in those participants 
presenting higher psychological distress at baseline (i.e. six weeks before post-intervention measures). 
These findings concur with Reeve et al.’s (2018) meta- 
analysis of ACT for burnout in mental health pro-
fessionals, which concluded that ACT is particularly 
useful for those staff members who present high lev-els of distress at baseline. This means that, even for 
those participants at greater risk of chronic stress 
and other related variables (e.g. distress), ACT is like-
ly to produce salutary effects of clinical significance. 
Importantly, the use of ACT process measures 
allowed the researchers to examine whether inter-vention effects were mediated by changes in the un-
derlying theoretical components being targeted. For example, Frögéli et  al.’s (2015) study demonstrated that increases in psychological flexibility and mind-
fulness were distinctly predictive of decreases in 
perceived stress and burnout scores in their student 
nurse participants. McConachie et al. (2014) reported a  significant reduction in thought suppression be-tween post-intervention and follow-up observations in their intervention group, leading to decreased reduction in psychological distress. This latter find-ing is especially important as thought suppression is actively encouraged in some other intervention 
frameworks (e.g. traditional CBT approaches), sug-
gesting that these may actually increase the risk of 
work-related distress. 
implications for future 
research
The stress management interventions for oncology nurses discussed herein offer varied results, with the overall picture not being entirely clear or conclusive. Psychotherapeutic interventions appear to provide the most promising results compared to educational approaches, in terms of efficacy and methodologi -
cal robustness. A comprehensive review of this lit -
erature would not be complete without a critical re -
view of the methodology. Word space precludes us spending too much time on this; however, there are some important limitations in previous work that are worth highlighting and considering for future study design.
lessons to be learned: methodolog Ical 
lImItatIons of current Intervent Ion 
stud Ies
Firstly, the general under-reporting of effect sizes across the literature considerably hinders both the interpretation and applicability of intervention find-ings. Stress management interventions aim to be both preventative and reactive. Thus, to effectively demonstrate these qualities, studies must report long-lasting intervention effects (i.e. robust effect 
sizes of clinical significance at follow-up). Such ef-
fects would imply that participants learn to use self-
care skills and incorporate them beyond the duration 
of the study: a hallmark of lasting behaviour change. 
However, we recognise that the interpretation of 
these effect sizes may be confusing due in part to the variability in reporting effect sizes, and the dif-ferent (or lack of, e.g. Duarte & Pinto-Gouveia, 2016) follow-up periods and outcome measures which are incorporated across studies.
Control groups are an important quality indica-
tor for intervention research (Street & Luoma, 2002). 
They can be used to (i) examine if an intervention af-
fects a desired outcome beyond what would naturally 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
300 health psychology reportoccur over the course of the study; and (ii) to estab-
lish that changes in the outcome are not caused by 
extraneous variables associated with the participant 
(e.g. capability to deal with the problem, or readiness 
to change) (Street & Luoma, 2002). Whilst some stud-
ies on stress management for oncology nurses use control conditions, many tend to be either wait-list 
groups (Cohen-Katz et  al., 2005; Duarte &  Pinto-
Gouveia, 2016) or control groups which received no 
‘intervention’ at all (e.g. Le Blanc et al., 2007). Some 
studies report greater effects in their intervention than the mere passage of time (i.e. a wait-list group), 
but it is often difficult to measure what specifically is 
happening for the control group, making compari-
sons between the conditions difficult. Only a  small 
handful of studies reviewed here (e.g. Habibian et al., 2018; Poulsen et  al., 2015; Udo et  al., 2013; Villani 
et al., 2013) used active control groups – conditions 
which received ‘neutral’ exercises/sessions, often re-
ferred to as ‘psychosocial placebos’ – and it is these 
studies which are able to demonstrate greater control over non-specific factors (e.g. therapist competence), 
thus concluding with more confidence that differ-
ences in observed outcomes between the groups are 
more likely due to the intervention effects (Street 
& Luoma, 2002).
Intervention length is an important consideration 
too; attrition rates are typically higher in longer in-tervention studies, which can lead to potential bias, and have detrimental effects on the internal/exter-
nal validity of results (Barry, 2005). In the current 
literature, many of the studies report attrition rates 
(though Villani et al., 2013 did not), and most of these 
are relatively low (e.g. n  =  4 in Cohen-Katz et  al., 
2005), even when their intervention could be consid-
ered lengthy in this setting (eight 2.5-hour weekly 
sessions in Cohen-Katz et al.’s, 2005 case). Some stud-
ies, however, do report higher attrition rates, which 
becomes especially problematic where baseline sam-ple sizes are also small (e.g. Onan et al., 2013; Poulsen 
et  al., 2015; Udo et  al., 2013). Whilst explanations 
for their attrition rates are often provided, some of 
which cannot be controlled for (e.g. maternity leave; 
Onan et al., 2013), the majority are due to incomplete data sets and/or participants not completing all of the 
intervention sessions. This is likely due to busy work 
schedules (Walczak et al., 1994), which, although rea-
sonable, leaves little room for statistical control of 
these potentially confounding effects. This further emphasises a need for briefer intervention packages 
in the future. ACT is useful in this context due to its 
versatility (e.g. group-based delivery; Walser & Pis-
torello, 2004) and ability to produce promising effects 
with intervention packages as brief as 1-2 hours (see Strosahl et al., 2012 for a detailed overview).
Many published interventions do not use (or clear-
ly justify and explain) empirically validated princi-ples or frameworks which inform intervention com-ponents. This is especially the case with educational 
interventions (e.g. Le Blanc et al., 2007; Poulsen et al., 
2015; Udo et al., 2013), compared with psychological 
interventions (e.g. Cohen-Katz et al., 2005; Habibian 
et al., 2018). The former generally lack a detailed ra-
tionale for how that intervention package has been constructed (i.e. justification for why the different 
components and exercises are included in the pro-
tocols), an issue raised almost two decades ago that 
seems not to have since been improved (Mimura 
& Griffiths, 2003). Comparatively, Cohen-Katz et al. (2005) and Duarte and Pinto-Gouveia’s (2016) use of 
MBSR is well described and justified through presen-
tation of the MBSR model, and previous evidence in 
similar populations. Of course, it is difficult to know 
whether this is a problem of the study design per se, or of word limitation imposed in journal reporting. 
As mentioned previously, ACT is an empirically vali-
dated framework (Hayes, 2016), with individually de-
fined components which can be applied to numerous 
contexts and needs (i.e. a transdiagnostic approach; McHugh, 2011). This makes ACT a suitable method to 
address the issues previously raised by Mimura and 
Griffiths (2003). We recommend that future studies 
in this context appropriately describe how their ACT 
intervention is designed for the target population and needs. 
In addition to reporting why certain interven-
tion components are included, it is advantageous that study designs include measurement of pro-
cess change to examine whether the intervention 
is affecting change in the way it is designed to. This 
knowledge further increases understanding of the 
components that possibly promote the effect, and which can be built upon in subsequent research to 
promote those aspects more effectively (Levin et al., 
2012). Few published studies using educational inter-
vention frameworks include such measures, which 
makes it difficult to confidently state whether the observed effects are due to the content of those inter-
ventions. In comparison, studies using psychological 
interventions generally provide a  more data-driven 
approach to intervention design and testing. For 
example, Duarte and Pinto-Gouveia (2016) assessed change in mindfulness using process measures and 
how this relates to outcome improvement (e.g. me-
diation analysis; Imai et al., 2010). This methodologi-
cal approach concurs with the recent paradigm shift  
towards process-based therapy in intervention re-search (Hofmann & Hayes, 2018). Not assessing pro-
cesses of change also impairs our ability to refine in-
terventions over time, or to distil them to their most 
impactful components. Given the time pressures for 
intervention delivery, information as to which pro-cesses should be preferentially targeted would be 
valuable to maximise effectiveness. In this review, 
neither Villani et al. (2013) nor Habibian et al. (2018), who each tested psychotherapeutic interventions, in-
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
301 volume 9(4), cluded process measures. The latter case is especially 
surprising given the abundance of psychometrics of-
fered by the ACT literature to assess process change 
(Levin et al., 2012). We therefore recommend that all 
ACT-based research in employee stress management 
ensure that validated process measures are included in its methodology.
To further illustrate the importance of specifying 
and measuring intervention components, a  meta-
analysis of 55 occupational stress intervention studies 
including over 2400 participants across various set-tings (including nursing and hospital contexts) found 
that cognitive-behavioural programmes produced 
larger effects compared to other interventions, for 
example, relaxation and organisational interventions 
(Richardson &  Rothstein, 2008). However, the au-thors concluded that the more complex and lengthier 
the intervention, and as more components are added, 
the poorer the improvement in stress, as this often 
confuses and overwhelms participants (Richardson 
& Rothstein, 2008). This therefore makes the tailoring of intervention content an important process. Previ-
ous research revealed that participants perceive that 
tailored interventions make it easier to remember 
the information provided, allowing one to apply the 
techniques outside of the training environment more effectively (Ryan &  Lauver, 2002). Nonetheless, the 
lack of intervention tailoring continues to permeate 
the literature. Habibian et al. (2018), for example, did not implement a tailored manual in their study but 
instead used an ACT intervention (Bach &  Hayes, 
2002) originally designed for hospitalisation preven-
tion for patients diagnosed with psychosis to guide 
their content. This might have made it difficult for participants to understand how the ACT-based skills 
could be applied to their specific setting and experi-
ences, which may, in part, explain the lack of effect on 
burnout scores observed in their study. Understand-
ing the mechanisms of effect within an intervention allows one to develop tailored, data-driven interven-
tions, and is a pertinent step is avoiding the issues 
raised above by Richardson and Rothstein (2008). In 
the context of nurse stress management, our recent 
empirical research (Kent et  al., 2019) recommends that ACT interventions prioritise acceptance, mind-
fulness and values-based processes, as these appear 
to have the most potential in demonstrating benefi-
cial effects for this population.
Whilst research investigates ACT interventions 
in this context, in the meantime we recommend that employers and health services use current psycho-
therapeutic stress management interventions which 
are based on evidence stemming from methodologi-
cally robust research (e.g. those that include media-tion analyses). In this context, mindfulness-based ap-
proaches are growing ever more popular, given the 
abundance of evidence in the MBSR literature, and are a viable starting point which can be further de-veloped and optimised in the future (e.g. using ACT 
principles such as values-based living).
conclusions
Given the prevalence of chronic stress in oncology 
nurse populations, there is a clear need for further 
research testing effective and acceptable interven-
tions. The existing literature reports only a handful 
of studies which use validated psychotherapeutic 
models for effective stress management, though it is these kinds of interventions that may produce more reliable, longer-lasting effects. It is plausible to as-sume that longer-term reduction of stress will act as a preventive strategy for decreasing future risks of burnout and compassion fatigue. Although ACT has only been tested once in an oncology nursing sample 
(Habibian et al., 2018), there is a conceptual overlap 
with findings reported in the non-interventional, ob-servational, theoretical modelling work undertaken in oncology nursing samples (e.g. Cheng et al., 2015; Corso, 2012; da Fonte Sousa Gomes et  al., 2013).  
We present a case in this paper that we believe sup-ports the need for further intervention research using this framework, and we have highlighted important methodological limitations in the extant literature 
that should be considered in the design and imple-
mentation of these future studies. 
References
Abendroth, M., & Flannery, J. (2006). Predicting the risk 
of compassion fatigue: a study of hospice nurses. 
Journal of Hospice & Palliative Nursing,  8, 346–356. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/00129191-200611000-00007
Abratt, R. P. (2020). Patient care and staff well-being in 
oncology during the coronavirus pandemic–Ethi -
cal considerations. South African Journal of Oncol -
ogy, 4, 1–3. https://doi.org/10.4102/sajo.v4i0.129
Alacacioglu, A., Yavuzsen, T., Dirioz, M., Oztop, I., 
& Yilmaz, U. (2009). Burnout in nurses and phy-sicians working at an oncology department. Psy-
cho‐Oncology, 18, 543–548. https://doi.org/10.1002/
pon.1432
Aycock, N., & Boyle, D. (2009). Interventions to man-
age compassion fatigue in oncology nursing. 
Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 13, 183–191. 
https://doi.org/10.1188/09.CJON.183-191
Bach, P., & Hayes, S. C. (2002). The use of acceptance 
and commitment therapy to prevent the rehos-
pitalization of psychotic patients: a  randomized controlled trial. Journal of Consulting and Clini-
cal Psychology, 70, 1129–1139. https://doi.org/
10.1037/0022-006X.70.5.1129
Barnard, D., Street, A., &  Love, A. W. (2006). Rela-
tionships between stressors, work supports, and 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
302 health psychology reportburnout among cancer nurses. Cancer Nursing, 29, 
338–345. https://doi.org/10.1097/00002820-200607 
000-00013
Barrett, L., & Yates, P. (2002). Oncology/haematology 
nurses: a study of job satisfaction, burnout, and in -
tention to leave the specialty. Australian Health Re -
view,  25, 109–121. https://doi.org/ 10.1071/ah020109
Barry, A. E. (2005). How attrition impacts the internal 
and external validity of longitudinal research. The 
Journal of School Health, 75, 267–270. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1746-1561.2005.tb06687.x
Bazarko, D., Cate, R. A., Azocar, F., & Kreitzer, M. J. 
(2013). The impact of an innovative mindfulness-
based stress reduction program on the health and 
well-being of nurses employed in a corporate set-
ting. Journal of Workplace Behavioral Health, 28, 
107–133. https://doi.org/10.1080/15555240.2013.77
9518
Biglan, A., Hayes, S. C., &  Pistorello, J. (2008). Ac-
ceptance and commitment: Implications for pre-
vention science. Prevention Science, 9, 139–152. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11121-008-0099-4
Blackledge, J. T., & Hayes, S. C. (2001). Emotion regu-
lation in acceptance and commitment therapy. 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 57, 243–255. https://
doi.org/10.1002/1097-4679(200102)57:2<243::AID-
JCLP9>3.0.CO;2-X
Bond, F. W., & Bunce, D. (2000). Mediators of change 
in emotion-focused and problem-focused work-site stress management interventions. Journal 
of Occupational Health Psychology, 5, 156–163. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/1076-8998.5.1.156
Bond, F. W., & Donaldso-Feilder, E. J. (2004). The rela -
tive importance of psychological acceptance and emotional intelligence to workplace well-being. 
British Journal of Guidance & Counselling,  32, 187–
203. https://doi.org/10.1080/08069880410001692210
Bond, F. W., Hayes, S. C., & Barnes-Holmes, D. (2006). 
Psychological flexibility, ACT, and organization-
al behavior. Journal of Organizational Behavior 
Management, 26, 25–54. https://doi.org/10.1300/
J075v26n01_02
Bond, F. W., Lloyd, J., & Guenole, N. (2013). The work‐
related acceptance and action questionnaire: Ini-tial psychometric findings and their implications 
for measuring psychological flexibility in specific 
contexts. Journal of Occupational and Organiza-
tional Psychology, 86, 331–347. https://doi.org/
10.1111/joop.12001
Bourdeanu, L., Zhou, Q., De Samper, M., Peri -
cak, K. A., & Pericak, A. (2020). Burnout, workplace factors, and intent to leave among hematology/on -
cology nurse practitioners. Journal of the Advanced 
Practitioner in Oncology,  11, 141–148. https://doi.
org/10.6004/jadpro.2020.11.2.2
Brinkborg, H., Michanek, J., Hesser, H., &  Berg-
lund,  G. (2011). Acceptance and commitment therapy for the treatment of stress among social workers: a randomized controlled trial. Behaviour 
Research and Therapy, 49, 389–398. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.brat.2011.03.009
Boorman, S. (2009). NHS Health and Well-Being Re-
view. Retrieved from: http://webarchive.nation-
alarchives.gov.uk/20130107105354/http://www.dh.gov.uk/prod_consum_dh/groups/dh_digitalas -
sets/documents/digitalasset/dh_108907.pdf
Butts, C. M., &  Gutierrez, D. (2018). Using accep -
tance and commitment therapy to (re)concep -
tualize stress appraisal. Journal of Mental Health 
Counseling,  40, 95–112. https://doi.org/10.17744/
mehc.40.2.01
Cheng, F., Meng, A. F., & Jin, T. (2015). Correlation 
between burnout and professional value in chi-nese oncology nurses: a questionnaire survey. In-
ternational Journal of Nursing Sciences, 2, 153–157. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnss.2015.04.004
Chiesa, A., & Serretti, A. (2009). Mindfulness-based 
stress reduction for stress management in healthy people: a  review and meta-analysis. The Journal 
of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 15, 
593–600. https://doi.org/10.1089/acm.2008.0495
Cohen-Katz, J., Wiley, S. D., Capuano, T., Baker, D. M., 
&  Shapiro, S. (2005). The effects of mindfulness‐based stress reduction on nurse stress and burn -
out, part II: a quantitative and qualitative study. 
Holistic Nursing Practice,  19, 26–35. https://doi.
org/10.1097/00004650-200501000-00008
Corner, J. (2002). Nurses’ experiences of cancer. Euro-
pean Journal of Cancer Care, 11, 193–199. https://
doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-2354.2002.00339.x
Corso, V. M. (2012). Oncology nurse as wounded 
healer: Developing a compassion identity. Clinical 
Journal of Oncology Nursing, 16, 448–450. https://
doi.org/10.1188/12.CJON.448-450
Craigie, M., Slatyer, S., Hegney, D., Osseiran-Mois-
son, R., Gentry, E., Davis, S., Dolan, T., & Rees, C. 
(2016). A pilot evaluation of a  mindful self-care and resiliency (MSCR) intervention for nurses. 
Mindfulness, 7, 764–774. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12671-016-0516-x
da Fonte Sousa Gomes, S., dos Santos, M. M. M. C. C., 
& da Mata Almeida Carolino, E. T. (2013). Psycho-social risks at work: Stress and coping strate-
gies in oncology nurses. Revista Latino-Ameri-
cana de Enfermagem, 21, 1282–1289. https://doi.org/10.1590/0104-1169.2742.2365
Dahl, J., Wilson, K. G., & Nilsson, A. (2004). Accept-
ance and commitment therapy and the treatment of persons at risk for long-term disability result-
ing from stress and pain symptoms: a preliminary 
randomized trial. Behavior Therapy, 35, 785–801. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7894(04)80020-0
Davis, E. L., Deane, F. P., & Lyons, G. C. (2015). Ac-
ceptance and valued living as critical appraisal 
and coping strengths for caregivers dealing with terminal illness and bereavement. Pallia-
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
303 volume 9(4), tive and Supportive Care, 13, 359–368. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1478951514000431
De la Fuente-Solana, E. I., Pradas-Hernández, L., Ra-
miro-Salmerón, A., Suleiman-Martos, N., Gómez-
Urquiza, J. L., Albendín-García, L., & Cañadas-De 
la Fuente, G. A. (2020). Burnout syndrome in pae-diatric oncology nurses: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Healthcare, 8, 309–321. https://doi.
org/10.3390/healthcare8030309
Delaney, M. C. (2018). Caring for the caregivers: Eval-
uation of the effect of an eight-week pilot mind-
ful self-compassion (MSC) training program on 
nurses’ compassion fatigue and resilience. PLoS 
One, 13, e0207261. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0207261
Domagała, P. M., & Gaworska-Krzemińska, A. (2018). 
Stress and burnout among oncology nurses: re-view study. Polish Psychological Bulletin, 49, 482–
488. https://doi.org/10.24425/124346
Duarte, J., &  Pinto-Gouveia, J. (2016). Effectiveness 
of a  mindfulness-based intervention on oncol-
ogy nurses’ burnout and compassion fatigue 
symptoms: a non-randomized study. International 
Journal of Nursing Studies, 64, 98–107. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2016.10.002
Duarte, J., &  Pinto-Gouveia, J. (2017). The role of 
psychological factors in oncology nurses’ burn-out and compassion fatigue symptoms. European 
Journal of Oncology Nursing, 28, 114–121. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2017.04.002
Ekedahl, M., & Wengström, Y. (2007). Nurses in can-
cer care – stress when encountering existential issues. European Journal of Oncology Nursing, 11, 
228–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2006.09.005
Escot, C., Artero, S., Gandubert, C., Boulenger, J. P., 
& Ritchie, K. (2001). Stress levels in nursing staff  
working in oncology. Stress and Health, 17, 273–
279. https://doi.org/10.1002/smi.907
Figley, C. R. (Ed.). (1995). Compassion fatigue: Coping 
with secondary traumatic stress disorder in those 
who treat the traumatized.  Brunner/Mazel.
Flaxman, P. E., & Bond, F. W. (2010a). A randomised 
worksite comparison of acceptance and commit-
ment therapy and stress inoculation training. Be-
haviour Research and Therapy, 48, 816–820. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2010.05.004
Flaxman, P. E., &  Bond, F. W. (2010b). Worksite 
stress management training: Moderated effects and clinical significance. Journal of Occupation-
al Health Psychology, 15, 347–358. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0020522
Flaxman, P. E., Bond, F. W., & Livheim, F. (2013). The 
mindful and effective employee: An acceptance and commitment therapy training manual for improving well-being and performance. New Harbinger Pub-
lications. 
Florio, G. A., Donelly, J. P., &  Zevon, M. A. (1998). 
The structure of work-related stress and coping among oncology nurses in high-stress medical 
settings: a transactional analysis. Journal of Occu-
pational Health Psychology, 3, 227–242. https://doi.
org/10.1037/1076-8998.3.3.227
Forman, E. M., Butryn, M. L., Hoffman, K. L., & Her-
bert, J. D. (2009). An open trial of an acceptance-
based behavioral intervention for weight loss. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 16, 223–235. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2008.09.005
Foureur, M., Besley, K., Burton, G., Yu, N., & Crisp, J. 
(2013). Enhancing the resilience of nurses and midwives: Pilot of a mindfulness-based program 
for increased health, sense of coherence and de-
creased depression, anxiety and stress. Contem-
porary Nurse, 45, 114–125. https://doi.org/10.5172/conu.2013.45.1.114
Frögéli, E., Djordjevic, A., Rudman, A., Livheim, F., 
& Gustavsson, P. (2015). A randomized controlled pilot trial of Acceptance and Commitment Train-
ing (ACT) for preventing stress-related ill health 
among future nurses. Anxiety, Stress, &  Coping: 
An International Journal, 29, 1–17. https://doi.org/
10.1080/10615806.2015.1025765
Frögéli, E., Rudman, A., & Gustavsson, P. (2019). Pre -
venting stress-related ill health among future 
nurses: Effects over 3 years. International Journal 
of Stress Management,  26, 272–286. https://doi.
org/10.1037/str0000110
Gerhart, J., O’Mahony, S., Abrams, I., Grosse, J., 
Greene, M., &  Levy, M. (2016). A pilot test of 
a  mindfulness-based communication training to 
enhance resilience in palliative care professionals. 
Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science, 5, 89–96. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2016.04.003
Gomez-Urquiza, J. L., Aneas-López, A. B., Albendín-
García, L., & Díaz-Rodríguez, L. (2016). Prevalence, 
risk factors, and levels of burnout among oncol-
ogy nurses: a systematic review. Oncology Nursing 
Forum, 43, E104-E120. https://doi.org/10.1188/16.
ONF.E104-E120
Guveli, H., Anuk, D., Oflaz, S., Guveli, M. E., Yil-
drim, N. K., Ozkan, M., & Ozkan, S. (2015). On-
cology staff: Burnout, job satisfaction and coping 
with stress. Psycho-Oncology, 24, 926–931. https://
doi.org/10.1002/pon.3743
Habibian, Z., Sadri, Z., & Nazmiyeh, H. (2018). Effects 
of group acceptance and commitment therapy-
based training on job stress and burnout among 
pediatric oncology and special diseases nurses. Iranian Journal of Pediatric Hematology and On-
cology, 8, 118–125.
Hayes, S. C. (2016). Acceptance and commitment 
therapy, relational frame theory, and the third 
wave of behavioral and cognitive therapies – re-published article. Behavior Therapy, 47, 869–885. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.beth.2016.11.006
Hayes, S. C., Barnes-Holmes, D., & Roche, B. (2001). 
Relational frame theory: A post-Skinnerian account 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
304 health psychology reportof human language and cognition. Springer Science 
& Business Media.
Hayes, S. C., Strosahl, K. D., & Wilson, K. G. (2011). 
Acceptance and commitment therapy: The process 
and practice of mindful change. Guilford Press. 
Heffner, M., Eifert, G. H., Parker, B. T., Hernan-
dez,  D.  H., &  Sperry, J. A. (2003). Valued direc-tions: Acceptance and commitment therapy in 
the treatment of alcohol dependence. Cognitive 
and Behavioral Practice, 10, 378–383. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S1077-7229(03)80055-X
Hernández-López, M., Luciano, M. C., Bricker, J. B., 
Roales-Nieto, J. G., &  Montesinos, F. (2009). Ac-ceptance and commitment therapy for smoking 
cessation: a preliminary study of its effectiveness 
in comparison with cognitive behavioral therapy. Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 23, 723–730. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0017632
Hofmann, S. G., &  Hayes, S. C. (2018). The future 
of intervention science: Process-based therapy. Clinical Psychological Science, 7, 37–50. https://doi.
org/10.1177/2167702618772296
Hooper, C., Craig, J., Janvrin, D. R., Wetsel, M. A., & Re -
imels, E. (2010). Compassion satisfaction, burnout, 
and compassion fatigue among emergency nurses 
compared with nurses in other selected inpatient specialties. Journal of Emergency Nursing,  36, 420–
427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jen.2009.11.027
Houck, D. (2014). Helping nurses cope with grief and 
compassion fatigue: an educational intervention. 
Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 18, 454–458. 
https://doi.org/10.1188/14.CJON.454-458
Hulbert, N. J., &  Morrison, V. L. (2006). A prelimi-
nary study into stress in palliative care: Opti-
mism, self-efficacy and social support. Psychology, 
Health &  Medicine, 11, 246–254. https://doi.org/
10.1080/13548500500266664  
Hulbert-Williams, L., Hochard, K. D., Hulbert-Williams, 
N., Archer, R., Nicholls, W., &  Wilson,  K. (2016). Contextual behavioural coaching: an evidence-
based model for supporting behaviour change. In-
ternational Coaching Psychology Review, 11 , 30–42.
Hulbert‐Williams, N. J., Storey, L., &  Wilson, K. G. 
(2015). Psychological interventions for patients 
with cancer: Psychological flexibility and the po-
tential utility of Acceptance and Commitment 
Therapy. European Journal of Cancer Care, 24, 
15–27. https://doi.org/10.1111/ecc.12223 
Iglesias, M. E. L., de Bengoa Vallejo, R. B., & Fuen -
tes, P. S. (2010). The relationship between experi -
ential avoidance and burnout syndrome in critical care nurses: a cross-sectional questionnaire survey. 
International Journal of Nursing Studies,  47, 30–37. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijnurstu.2009.06.014
Imai, K., Keele, L., & Tingley, D. (2010). A general ap-
proach to causal mediation analysis. Psychologi-
cal Methods, 15, 309–335. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0020761Isikhan, V., Comez, T., &  Danis, M. Z. (2004). Job 
stress and coping strategies in health care profes-sionals working with cancer patients. European 
Journal of Oncology Nursing, 8, 234–244. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2003.11.004
Joinson, C. (1992). Coping with compassion fatigue. 
Nursing, 22, 116–120.
Jones, M. C., Wells, M., Gao, C., Cassidy, B., & Davie, J. 
(2013). Work stress and well‐being in oncology set -
tings: a multidisciplinary study of health care pro -
fessionals. Psycho‐Oncology,  22, 46–53. https://doi.
org/10.1002/pon.2055
Kabat-Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using 
the wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain and illness. Delacorte.
Karekla, M., Konstantinou, P., Ioannou, M., Karek-
las, I., & Gloster, A. T. (2019). The phenomenon of treatment dropout, reasons and moderators in ac-
ceptance and commitment therapy and other ac-
tive treatments. Clinical Psychology in Europe, 1, 
1–36. https://doi.org/10.32872/cpe.v1i3.33058
Kashdan, T. B., Barrios, V., Forsyth, J. P., & Steger, M. F. 
(2006). Experiential avoidance as a  generalized 
psychological vulnerability: Comparisons with 
coping and emotion regulation strategies. Behav-
iour Research and Therapy, 44, 1301–1320. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2005.10.003
Kent, W., Hochard, K. D., &  Hulbert-Williams, N. J. 
(2019). Perceived stress and professional quality of 
life in nursing staff: How important is psychological 
flexibility? Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science, 
14, 11–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2019.08.004
Kravits, K., McAllister-Black, R., Grant, M., & Kirk, C. 
(2010). Self-care strategies for nurses: a psycho-ed -
ucational intervention for stress reduction and the prevention of burnout. Applied Nursing Research,  23, 
130–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apnr.2008.08.002
Kumar, M. Y. S., &  Bhalla, P. (2019). Stress among 
nursing staff in hospitals and its relation with job 
satisfaction, job performance and quality of nurs-
ing care: a literature review. Journal of Nursing and 
Care, 8, 1–5.
Kutluturkan, S., Sozeri, E., Uysal, N., & Bay, F. (2016). 
Resilience and burnout status among nurses work -
ing in oncology. Annals of General Psychiatry,  15, 
33–42. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12991-016-0121-3
Le Blanc, P. M., Hox, J. J., Schaufeli, W. B., Taris, T. W., 
& Peeters, M. C. (2007). Take care! The evaluation 
of a team-based burnout intervention program for oncology care providers. Journal of Applied Psy-
chology, 92, 213–227. https://doi.org/10.1037/0021-
9010.92.1.213
Levin, M. E., Hildebrandt, M. J., Lillis, J., & Hayes, S. C. 
(2012). The impact of treatment components sug-gested by the psychological flexibility model: 
a  meta-analysis of laboratory-based component 
studies. Behavior Therapy, 43, 741–756. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.beth.2012.05.003
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
305 volume 9(4), Lillis, J., Hayes, S. C., Bunting, K., & Masuda, A. (2009). 
Teaching acceptance and mindfulness to improve 
the lives of the obese: a preliminary test of a theo -
retical model. Annals of Behavioral Medicine,  37, 
58–69. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-009-9083-x
Lloyd, J., Bond, F. W., & Flaxman, P. E. (2013). The val -
ue of psychological flexibility: Examining psycho -
logical mechanisms underpinning a cognitive be -
havioural therapy intervention for burnout. Work 
& Stress,  27, 181–199. https://doi.org/10.1080/02678
373.2013.782157
Lomas, T., Medina, J. C., Ivtzan, I., Rupprecht, S., 
& Eiroa-Orosa, F. J. (2018). A systematic review and 
meta-analysis of the impact of mindfulness-based 
interventions on the well-being of healthcare pro -
fessionals. Mindfulness,  10, 1193–1216. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12671-018-1062-5
Losada, A., Márquez-González, M., Romero-Moreno, R., 
& López, J. (2014). Development and validation of the experiential avoidance in caregiving question -
naire (EACQ). Aging & Mental Health,  18, 897–904. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/13607863.2014.896868
Luoma, J. B., & Platt, M. G. (2015). Shame, self-criti-
cism, self-stigma, and compassion in Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Current Opinion in 
Psychology, 2, 97–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.co-
psyc.2014.12.016
Mackenzie, C. S., Poulin, P. A., &  Seidman-Carl-
son,  R. (2006). A brief mindfulness-based stress 
reduction intervention for nurses and nurse aides. 
Applied Nursing Research, 19, 105–109. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.apnr.2005.08.002
Maslach, C. (1982). Burnout: The cost of caring. Pren-
tice-Hall. 
Maslach, C., &  Goldberg, J. (1998). Prevention of 
burnout: New perspectives. Applied and Preven-
tive Psychology, 7, 63–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0962-1849(98)80022-X
McConachie, D. A. J., McKenzie, K., Morris, P. G., 
& Walley, R. M. (2014). Acceptance and mindful-ness-based stress management for support staff  
caring for individuals with intellectual disabilities. 
Research in Developmental Disabilities, 35, 1216–
1227. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ridd.2014.03.005
Mimura, C., & Griffiths, P. (2003). The effectiveness of 
current approaches to workplace stress manage -
ment in the nursing profession: an evidence-based literature review. Occupational and Environmen -
tal Medicine, 60 , 10–15. https://doi.org/10.1136/
oem.60.1.10
McHugh, L. (2011). A new approach in psychother-
apy: ACT (acceptance and commitment therapy). The World Journal of Biological Psychiatry, 12, 81–
84. https://doi.org/10.3109/15622975.2011.603225
Neff, K. D., Kirkpatrick, K. L., & Rude, S. S. (2007). 
Self-compassion and adaptive psychological func-
tioning. Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 139–
154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2006.03.004O’Brien, W. H., Singh, R., Horan, K., Moeller, M. T., 
Wasson, R., & Jex, S. M. (2019). Group-based ac-
ceptance and commitment therapy for nurses 
and nurse aides working in long-term care resi-
dential settings. The Journal of Alternative and 
Complementary Medicine, 25, 753–761. https://doi.
org/10.1089/acm.2019.0087
O’Mahony, S., Gerhart, J. I., Grosse, J., Abrams, I., 
& Levy, M. M. (2015). Posttraumatic stress symp-toms in palliative care professionals seeking 
mindfulness training: Prevalence and vulnerabil-ity. Palliative Medicine, 30, 189–192. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0269216315596459
Onan, N., Isil, O., & Barlas, G. Ü. (2013). The effect of 
a new coping intervention on stress and burnout in Turkish oncology nurses. Journal of Marmara 
University Institute of Health Sciences, 3, 121–130. 
Ortega-Campos, E., Vargas-Román, K., Velando-
Soriano, A., Suleiman-Martos, N., Cañadas-de la 
Fuente,  G.  A., Albendín-García, L., &  Gómez-Ur -
quiza,  J.  L. (2020). Compassion fatigue, compas -
sion satisfaction, and burnout in oncology nurses: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Sustainabil -
ity, 12 , 72–83. https://doi.org/10.3390/su12010072
Pakenham, K. I. (2015). Investigation of the util-
ity of the acceptance and commitment therapy 
(ACT) framework for fostering self-care in clini-
cal psychology trainees. Training and Education 
in Professional Psychology, 9, 144–152. https://doi.
org/10.1037/tep0000074
Plumb, J. C., Stewart, I., Dahl, J., & Lundgren, T. (2009). 
In search of meaning: Values in modern clinical behavior analysis. Behavior Analyst,  32, 85–103. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03392177
Potter, P., Deshields, T., Berger, J. A., Clarke, M., Ol-
sen, S., & Chen, L. (2013). Evaluation of a compas-
sion fatigue resiliency program for oncology nurs-
es. Oncology Nursing Forum, 40, 180–187. https://
doi.org/10.1188/13.ONF.180-187 
Potter, P., Deshields, T., Divanbeigi, J., Berger, J., Ci -
priano, D., Norris, L., & Olsen, S. (2010). Compas -
sion fatigue and burnout: Prevalence among oncol -
ogy nurses. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing,  14, 
E56–E62. https://doi.org/10.1188/10.CJON.E56-E62
Poulsen, A. A., Sharpley, C. F., Baumann, K. C., Hen-
derson, J., & Poulsen, M. G. (2015). Evaluation of 
the effect of a 1‐day interventional workshop on 
recovery from job stress for radiation therapists 
and oncology nurses: a randomised trial. Journal 
of Medical Imaging and Radiation Oncology, 59, 
491–498. https://doi.org/10.1111/1754-9485.12322
Powers, M. B., Zum Vörde Sive Vörding, M. B., & Em-
melkamp, P. M. (2009). Acceptance and commit-ment therapy: a  meta-analytic review. Psycho-
therapy and Psychosomatics, 78, 73–80. https://doi.
org/10.1159/000190790
Puolakanaho, A., Tolvanen, A., Kinnunen, S. M., & Lap -
palainen, R. (2020). A psychological flexibility-based 
William Kent, 
Nicholas J. Hulbert- 
Williams,  
Kevin D. Hochard
306 health psychology reportintervention for burnout: a randomized controlled 
trial. Journal of Contextual Behavioral Science, 15 , 
52–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcbs.2019.11.007
Raab, K. (2014). Mindfulness, self-compassion, and 
empathy among health care professionals: a  re-
view of the literature. Journal of Health Care 
Chaplaincy, 20, 95–108. https://doi.org/10.1080/08
854726.2014.913876
Raingruber, B., & Wolf, T. (2015). Nurse perspectives 
regarding the meaningfulness of oncology nursing practice. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing,  19, 
292–296. https://doi.org/10.1188/15.CJON.292-296
Reeve, A., Tickle, A., & Moghaddam, N. (2018). Are 
acceptance and commitment therapy-based in-
terventions effective for reducing burnout in 
direct-care staff? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Mental Health Review Journal, 23, 131–
155. https://doi.org/10.1108/MHRJ-11-2017-0052
Reynolds, S. (2000). Interventions: What works, what 
doesn’t? Occupational Medicine, 50 , 315–319. https://
doi.org/10.1093/occmed/50.5.315
Richardson, D. A., Hug, E., Jesse, M., Connors,  K., 
&  Schwartz, K. (2015). The relationship between compassion and psychological flexibility in medical 
students. Obstetrics & Gynecology,  126, 45S. https://
doi.org/10.1097/01.AOG.0000471070.21664.1e
Richardson, K. M., & Rothstein, H. R. (2008). Effects 
of occupational stress management intervention 
programs: a  meta-analysis. Journal of Occupa-
tional Health Psychology, 13, 69–93. https://doi.
org/10.1037/1076-8998.13.1.69
Roxburgh, M. (2006). An exploration of factors which 
constrain nurses from research participation. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 15, 535–545. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2702.2006.01374.x  
Ruiz, F. J. (2010). A review of acceptance and commit-
ment therapy (ACT) empirical evidence: Correla-
tional, experimental psychopathology, compo-
nent and outcome studies. International Journal of 
Psychology and Psychological Therapy, 10, 125–162.
Ryan, P., & Lauver, D. R. (2002). The efficacy of tai-
lored interventions. Journal of Nursing Scholar-
ship, 34, 331–337. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1547-5069.2002.00331.x
Sherman, A. C., Edwards, D., Simonton, S., &  Meh -
ta, P. (2006). Caregiver stress and burnout in an on -
cology unit. Palliative & Supportive Care,  4, 65–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/s1478951506060081
Stoddard, J. A., & Afari, N. (2014). The big book of ACT 
metaphors: a practitioner’s guide to experiential ex -
ercises and metaphors in Acceptance and Commit -
ment Therapy . New Harbinger Publications.
Street, L. L., &  Luoma, J. B. (2002). Control groups 
in psychosocial intervention research: Ethical and methodological issues. Ethics & Behavior, 12, 1–30. 
https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327019EB1201_1
Strosahl, K., Robinson, P., &  Gustavsson, T. (2012). 
Brief interventions for radical change: Principles and practice of focused acceptance and commit-
ment therapy. New Harbinger Publications.
Toh, S. G., Devi, M. K., & Ang, E. N. K. (2011). A sys-
tematic review on the relationship between the 
nursing shortage and nurses’ job satisfaction, 
stress and burnout levels in oncology/haematol-ogy settings. The JBI Database of Systematic Re-
views and Implementation Reports, 9, 1602–1649.
Udo, C., Danielson, E., Henoch, I., & Melin-Johans-
son, C. (2013). Surgical nurses’ work-related stress when caring for severely ill and dying patients in cancer after participating in an educational 
intervention on existential issues. European Jour-
nal of Oncology Nursing, 17, 546–553. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ejon.2013.02.002
van Mol, M. M., Kompanje, E. J., Benoit, D. D., Bak-
ker, J., & Nijkamp, M. D. (2015). The prevalence of compassion fatigue and burnout among health-
care professionals in intensive care units: a  sys-
tematic review. PLoS One, 10, e0136955. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0136955
Van Rooyen, D., Le Roux, L., & Kotzé, W. J. (2008). The 
experiential world of the oncology nurse. Health 
SA Gesondheid, 13, 18–30. https://doi.org/10.4102/
hsag.v13i3.283
Villani, D., Grassi, A., Cognetta, C., Cipresso, P., Tonio -
lo, D., & Riva, G. (2013). The effects of a mobile stress management protocol on nurses working with can -
cer patients: a preliminary controlled study. Studies 
in Health Technology and Informatics, 173 , 524–528. 
https://doi.org/10.3233/978-1-61499-022-2-524
Walczak, J. R., McGuire, D. B., Haisfield, M. E., & Bee -
zley, A. (1994). A survey of research-related activi -
ties and perceived barriers to research utilization 
among professional oncology nurses. Oncology 
Nursing Forum,  21, 710–715.
Wallace, J. E., Lemaire, J. B., &  Ghali, W. A. (2009). 
Physician wellness: a  missing quality indicator. The Lancet,  374, 1714–1721. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0140-6736(09)61424-0
Walser, R. D., & Pistorello, J. (2004). ACT in group for -
mat. In S. C. Hayes & K. D. Strosahl (Eds.), A prac -
tical guide to Acceptance and Commitment Therapy (pp. 347–372). Springer.
Watanabe, N., Horikoshi, M., Shinmei, I., Oe, Y., Nari-
sawa, T., Kumachi, M., Matsuoka, Y., Hamaza-ki, K., & Furukawa, T. A. (2019). Brief mindfulness-
based stress management program for a  better 
mental state in working populations – Happy Nurse Project: a randomized controlled trial. Jour-
nal of Affective Disorders, 251, 186–194. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jad.2019.03.067
Wazqar, D. Y. (2019). Oncology nurses’ perceptions of 
work stress and its sources in a university‐teach-ing hospital: a qualitative study. Nursing Open, 6, 
100–108. https://doi.org/10.1002/nop2.192
Wells-English, D., Giese, J., & Price, J. (2019). Com-
passion fatigue and satisfaction: Influence on 
A review  
of interventions for oncology nurse stress management
307 volume 9(4), turnover among oncology nurses at an urban can-cer center. Clinical Journal of Oncology Nursing, 23, 
487–493. https://doi.org/10.1188/19.CJON.487-493
Wenzel, J., Shaha, M., Klimmek, R., &  Krumm, S. 
(2011). Working through grief and loss: Oncology nurses’ perspectives on professional bereavement. Oncology Nursing Forum, 38, 272–282. https://doi.
org/10.1188/11.ONF.E272-E282
Wiklund Gustin, L., &  Wagner, L. (2013). The but-
terfly effect of caring – clinical nursing teachers’ understanding of self‐compassion as a source to compassionate care. Scandinavian Journal of Car-
ing Sciences, 27, 175–183. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1471-6712.2012.01033.x
Wilson, K. G., Sandoz, E. K., Kitchens, J., &  Rob-
erts, M. (2010). The Valued Living Questionnaire: Defining and measuring valued action within a behavioral framework. The Psychological Record, 
60, 249–272. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03395706
Wyatt, D., &  Hulbert-Williams, N. (2015). Cancer 
& cancer care. Sage Ltd.
Zadeh, S., Gamba, N., Hudson, C., &  Wiener, L. 
(2012). Taking care of care providers: a  wellness 
program for pediatric nurses. Journal of Pedi-
atric Oncology Nursing, 29, 294–299. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1043454212451793
