STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
Implementing training and support, financial
reimbursement, and referral to an internet-based
brief advice program to improve the early
identification of hazardous and harmful alcohol
consumption in primary care (ODHIN): study
protocol for a cluster randomized factorial trial
Myrna N Keurhorst1*, Peter Anderson2, Fredrik Spak3, Preben Bendtsen4, Lidia Segura5, Joan Colom5,
Jillian Reynolds6, Colin Drummond7, Paolo Deluca7, Ben van Steenkiste8, Artur Mierzecki9, Karolina K łoda9,
Paul Wallace10, Dorothy Newbury-Birch2, Eileen Kaner2, Toni Gual6and Miranda GH Laurant1
Abstract
Background: The European level of alcohol consumption, and the subsequent burden of disease, is high
compared to the rest of the world. While screening and brief interventions in primary healthcare are cost-effective,
in most countries they have hardly been implemented in routine primary healthcare. In this study, we aim to
examine the effectiveness and efficiency of three implementation interventions that have been chosen to address
key barriers for improvement: training and support to address lack of knowledge and motivation in healthcare
providers; financial reimbursement to compensate the time investment; and internet-based counselling to reduce
workload for primary care providers.
Methods/design: In a cluster randomized factorial trial, data from Catalan, English, Netherlands, Polish, and Swedish
primary healthcare units will be collected on screening and brief advice rates for hazardous and harmful alcohol
consumption. The three implementation strategies will be provided separately and in combination in a total of
seven intervention groups and compared with a treatment as usual control group. Screening and brief intervention
activities will be measured at baseline, during 12 weeks and after six months. Process measures include health
professionals ’role security and therapeutic commitment of the participating providers (SAAPPQ questionnaire).
A total of 120 primary healthcare units will be included, equally distributed over the five countries. Both intention
to treat and per protocol analyses are planned to determine intervention effectiveness, using random coefficient
regression modelling.
Discussion: Effective interventions to implement screening and brief interventions for hazardous alcohol use are
urgently required. This international multi-centre trial will provide evidence to guide decision makers.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov. Trial identifier: NCT01501552
Keywords: Alcohol, Screening, Brief interventions, Primary healthcare, Training and support, Financial
reimbursement, Internet, Implementation
* Correspondence: m.keurhorst@iq.umcn.nl
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Scientific Institute for Quality
of Healthcare (IQ healthcare), P.O. Box 9101, 114 IQ healthcare, 6500 HB
Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2013 Keurhorst et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Keurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
Background
The European Union (EU) has the highest alcohol con-
sumption of the world: in 2009, the average adult (aged 15+years) alcohol consumption in the EU was 12.5 litres of
pure alcohol [1]. A review showed that consumption above
20 to 30 grams of alcohol a day (two to three glasses ofwine) increases an individual ’s risks of mortality and mor-
bidity [2,3]. However, people often overestimate the posi-
tive health effects of alcohol; in fact, only small amounts ofalcohol have positive effects on health [2,3].
Alcohol consumption is the third world leading cause
of diseases and premature death [1]. The costs related toalcohol are €125bn a year for health, welfare, employment,
and criminal justice sectors as a consequence of alcohol-
attributable disease, injury, and violence [4]. Therefore,individuals and society would benefit from effective pre-
ventive measures with respect to morbidity and mortality
and social costs.
There is considerable evidence showing that early
identification of hazardous and harmful alcohol con-
sumption result in reduced alcohol consumption andimproved health outcomes. Primary healthcare (PHC) is
the primary point of contact for many people seeking
healthcare. In this setting, screening [5] and brief inter-vention programs have proven to be effective in redu-
cing alcohol consumption [6-10], with a mean reduction
of 38 grams of alcohol per week (three to four glasses ofwine) [10]. Although the evidence is still inconsistent
about positive effects of nurse-led interventions [11,12],
generally screening and brief interventions are providedby healthcare workers such as GPs, nurses, or psycholo-
gists [10]. The number needed to treat (NNT) in offering
screening and brief interventions is eight (for every eightpeople treated one will change their behaviour) [13],
which is relatively low compared to smoking cessation,
which has a NNT of around 35 or higher [14]. Despite theevidence for efficacy and cost-efficacy of screening and
brief interventions in PHC, these interventions are rarely
implemented in routine practice [15]. Commonly, lessthan 10% of the population at risk are identified, and less
than 5% of those who could benefit are offered screening
and brief interventions in PHC settings [15].
Some of the reasons for this gap are identified and can
be categorised in three main domains. First, evidence sug-gests there is substantial lack of knowledge among general
practitioners (GPs) [5,16]. A survey across 13 countries
found that one-third of all GPs reported never receivingalcohol-related education, 23% reported less than four
hours, and 37% reported more than seven hours of
alcohol-related education ever [17]. A recent update fromEngland has shown that 52% of the United Kingdom ’ss u r -
veyed GPs indicated that they had received less than four
hours of post-graduate training, continuing medical edu-cation, or clinical supervision on alcohol and alcoholrelated problems [18]. Furthermore a lack of role security
and therapeutic commitment has been identified [19].
Secondly, lack of adequate resources and support are
identified as important barriers [16,20]. Financial reim-
bursement could be important measures to overcome this
barrier, but as far as we know, there have been no rando-mised controlled trials conducted investigating the impact
of reimbursement for alcohol screening and brief interven-
tions in the PHC setting.
The third important barrier relates to time constrains
in terms of perceived workload and work pressure for
screening and brief intervention activities [5]. In PHC,trained nurses are increasingly involved in preventive
care activities and in the management of chronic ill
patients due to the increased workload of GPs. It hasshown that they provide safe and effective care [21]. This
study focuses on all healthcare professionals working at
primary healthcare units (PHCUs).
Although previous implementation studies [22,23] have
tried to increase screening and brief interventions in pri-
mary healthcare, the gap between scientific knowledgeand everyday clinical practice remains [24]. With regard to
the first category of barriers of knowledge and attitude,
earlier studies found that training and support could makeGPs even less secure in their work with drinkers, when
the training and support does not address prior GP ’sa t t i -
tude in the training and support [15,19]. In the ODHINstudy, we will tailor our implementation strategy to the
primary healthcare worker ’s prior attitude. With regard to
the second category, lack of resources, there are mixedresults of evidence of finance systems to change provider
behaviour [25,26]. There is limited evidence that finance
systems can change provider behaviour of screening andbrief interventions of alcohol [15]. Still, financial incentives
for smoking cessation interventions have shown a signifi-
cant positive outcome on increases in referral to tobaccocessation services [27], and suggest financial support for
alcohol interventions might be effective. In the third cat-
egory, workload and work pressure, we suggest e-healthinterventions might be of benefit. E-self help interventions
without therapist support are available both in brief and
more extended formats and have shown to be effective
in reduction of alcohol consumption [28]. Additionally,
internet interventions with therapist support focused ondepression and anxiety were found to have larger effect
sizes compared to internet interventions without therap-
ist support [29], but has not yet been tested for alcoholinternet interventions. These e-health interventions
might be helpful to reduce workload of healthcare pro-
fessionals after identification of patients at risk as well asavailability for patients 24 h a day. Therefore, it is of
interest to test if primary healthcare workers ’referral to
internet-based brief interventions, hereafter termed e-BI,could be time-saving for healthcare professionals andKeurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11 Page 2 of 7
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
consequently might raise primary care worker ’s interven-
tion activity.
It is of significant public health interest to explore, and
optimize, effective implementation strategies to improve
PHC activities in screening and brief interventions for
hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption. In thecurrent study, we evaluate the effect of three strategies,
each aimed to tackle one of the above reported barriers,
singly or in combination, in order to overcome the gapbetween knowledge and daily practice.
Aim and objectives
Our aim is to study the effectiveness of training and sup-
port (T&S), financial reimbursement, and internet based
brief interventions (e-BI), targeted singly or in combin-ation to primary healthcare units, on screening and brief
intervention activities, compared to treatment as usual.
The following hypotheses will be tested in the study:
1. Provision of training and support to primary
healthcare providers will increase use of preventivescreening and brief interventions compared to a care
as usual control group.
2. Financial reimbursement to primary healthcare
providers as a pay-for-performance of brief alcohol
interventions will increase screening and brief
intervention rates compared to care as usual.
3. Providing resources, i.e., offering referral possibility
to an internet-based method of delivering brief
intervention, will increase screening and briefintervention rates compared to care as usual.
4. The combination of training and support, financial
reimbursement, and e-BI will be more effective inincreasing screening and brief intervention rates
compared to single-focused implementation
strategies.
Methods
Design
Our study is designed as a cluster randomized factorial trial.
Data from PHCUs in Catalonia, England, the Netherlands,
Poland, and Sweden will be combined to examine the effectof three different implementation strategies singly or in
combination on screening and brief advice rates for hazard-
ous and harmful alcohol cons umption compared with care
as usual (controls). In all countries, the complete trial will
be conducted between August 2012 and December 2013.
Participants
PHCUs with approximately 5,000 to 20,000 registered
patients will be the unit of randomization and implemen-tation. In Poland, because practitioners normally operate
as single-handed entities working with other practitioners
in one building, three practitioners and their staff workingin one building will be the unit of randomization. PHCUs
who agree to participate in the study are volunteers that
will be drawn from administrative or academic registriesof PHCU at national or regional levels. PHCUs that have
current ongoing alcohol-related projects that have a focus
on screening and brief interventions, involve GPs and/ornurses, and include one of the ODHIN implementation
strategies, will be excluded.
Besides fully-trained GPs, nurses or practice assistants
with a permanent appointment working in the PHCU
and involved in medical and/or preventive care are also
eligible, because they also have skills to assist in screen-ing and brief interventions [12,30,31]. At the start of the
study, all eligible providers within the PHCU will be
identified by the research team. Participating providersare those eligible providers who agree to participate in
the trial. Before baseline measurement, the participating
providers have to sign up for the study, allowing PHCUwith a high number of staff to include only a selection of
staff. Staff not able to attend this meeting but willing to
participate will be informed by the contact person in thePHCU. These providers will also sign an informed con-
sent for their participation. In the Netherlands, England,
Poland and Sweden, PHCU will receive a trial fee. Thetrial flow chart is shown in Figure 1.
Implementation strategies
The implementation period will last twelve weeks, withthe start date for each country between November 2012and March 2013. The start date of the implementation
period for each PHCU will be staggered. Implementation
strategies are outlined in detail in Table 1. All groupswill receive the same input as controls but with add-
itional components added. These strategies are about to
be tested singly or in combination:
1. Control group, treatment as usual
2. T&S3. Financial reimbursement
4. e-BI
5. T&S and financial reimbursement6. T&S and e-BI
7. Financial reimbursement and e-BI
8. T&S, financial reimbursement, and e-BI
A graphical depiction of the study is depicted in
Additional file 1.
An introductory meeting (first briefing) will be held in
all PHCUs that agree to participate in the study, describ-
ing the study ’s purpose and the four-week baseline data
collection, which will follow the introductory meeting.
After the baseline data collection, all PHCUs will receive
a second briefing within one month, either face to faceKeurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11 Page 3 of 7
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
or by telephone, tailor-made to the study group to which
they are allocated.
Outcomes
Primary outcomes: screening and brief advice rates
PHCUs will be asked to screen all patients aged 18 years
and over who attended the PHCU. These patients aredefined as eligible patients.
Patients will be screened for hazardous and harmful al-
cohol consumption with AUDIT-C [32]. Screen positives,or at risk patients, are defined as those who scored ≥5f o r
men or ≥4 for women on AUDIT-C. Participating staff
that have signed up to the study will be asked to deliverbrief alcohol advice of 5 to 15 min duration to at-risk
patients, with the length and format of the brief advice
based on country-specific guidelines or, for Poland wherenational guidelines are lacking, the European guidelines
developed by PHEPA [33]. Providers of PHCUs allocated
to e-BI activity will be asked to refer patients to a compu-terized brief advice program, considered equivalent to pro-
viding brief advice. Besides counting referral rate to e-BI,
actual e-BI log-in rates of patients will be collected.Screening and brief advice will be measured at five
timepoints: during the four-week baseline period, thethree consecutive four-week blocks during the twelve
week implementation period; and, the four-week follow-
up period, which will occur during the seventh monthafter the end of the twelve-week implementation period
using paper tally sheets, with the exception of Catalonia
who will use their electronic patient records. The tallysheets include AUDIT-C scores ( i.e., identification of at
risk patients) with additional table to indicate the type of
brief advice that was delivered to the patients at risk.Gender and age of patients will be recorded as well as
the name and profession of the provider.
The screening rate will be calculated as the number of
completed screens divided by the total number of con-
sultations of all patients eligible for screening (as definedabove) per participating provider times 100. The brief
advice rate will be calculated as the number of BIs deliv-
ered (received oral brief advice, and/or were given an ad-vice leaflet, and/or were referred to the e-BI program,
and/or were referred to another provider in or outside
the practice), divided by the total number of screen posi-tives per participating provider times 100. InformationAssessing number of eligible PHCUs and providers
Randomization of at minimum 120 PHCUs
1: 15 PHCU
controlsN PHCU not eligible
2: 15 PHCU 
T&S3: 15 PHCU 
Financial4: 15 PHCU
e-BI
5: 15 PHCU 
T&S+ 6: 15 PHCU
T&S+e-BI7: 15 PHCU
Financial+ e-8:15PHCU 
T&S+
N PHCU lost to follow-up
N PHCU analysed
N Providers analysedEnrolment Allocation Analysis Follow-up
Figure 1 Trial flow chart is required.Keurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11 Page 4 of 7
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
will also be collected on the number of screen negatives
who received brief advice.
Screening and brief advice rates will be calculated at two
levels: at an aggregate PHCU level for all participating
providers in the PHCU; and, at an individual provider
level for each participating and actively participating pro-viders. Participating providers are defined as those who
attended the first briefing, or who were identified as join-
ing the study by the contact person of the PHCU at thefirst briefing. Actively participating providers are defined
as those participating providers who completed at least
one tally sheet or computerized record during one of the
measurement periods.
Secondary outcomes: role security and therapeutic
commitment
Role security and therapeutic commitment of the par-
ticipating providers will be measured by the short ver-sion of the Alcohol and Alcohol Problems Perception
questionnaire (SAAPPQ) [34] at three time points: at or
immediately after the first introduction meeting, at theend of the 12-week implementation period, and during
the end of the four-week follow-up period. All partici-
pating providers who have signed an informed consentwill be asked to complete the SAAPPQ at each of the
three time points. The responses will be summed within
the two scales of role security and therapeutic commit-ment. Individual missing values for any of the items in a
domain will be assigned the mean value of the remaining
items of the domain before summation.
Randomization and blinding
Randomization will take place after formal agreement ofthe PHCU to take part in the trial. The PHCU will be ran-
domly allocated to one of eight groups by the European
coordinating centre, using computerized randomizationstratifying by country, ensuring 15 PHCUs per group
(three per country). Although the PHCUs will be ran-
domly allocated before the baseline measurement, the re-search team in each of the countries and the PHCU only
are informed of the allocation after collection of the base-
line measurement to avoid bias as a result of group alloca-tion. For the remainder of the study period, the PHCU
and investigators will not be blind to group allocation.
Sample size
It is estimated that 56 PHCUs (seven per eight allocation
groups) with a minimum of 1,000 eligible patients perTable 1 Outline of intervention groups with three different implementation strategies
1. Control Group —treatment as usual: The control group will receive a package, either hand-delivered or by post, containing a summary card of the
national guideline recommendation for screening and brief advice for hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption, without demonstration. InPoland, where no national guidelines exist, the summary card will be adapted from the PHEPA guidelines for the purposes of this trial [ 33]. No
further instructions will be given.
2. Training and support: Countries differ largely with regard to usual T&S and other educational training of primary care staff. To maximise
comparability, a set of minimal and maximal criteria have been established, in which each country specific T&S package should fit.
In addition to receiving the same package as the control group, the T&S group will be offered two initial 1 to 2 hours face-to-face educational
trainings, and one (10 to 30 min) telephone support call to the lead PHCU contact person during the twelve week implementation period. If
necessary, one additional face-to-face training of 1 to 2 h duration will be offered. The time intervals between the initial training, the telephone
call, and the additional optional training will be, on average, two weeks. The training addresses knowledge, skills, attitudes, and perceived barri ers
and facilitators in implementing screening and brief advice, combining theory and practical exercises. The location of the educational training wi ll
vary from country to country and include in-house meetings at the PHCU or within clusters of PHCUs. The trainers will include peer trainers,
members of the research team, accredited teachers, or addiction consultants. Each country will use an adapted existing country-based T&S
package. In the case of Poland, the T&S package will be based on the PHEPA training program.
3. Financial reimbursement: In addition to receiving the same package as the control group, financial reimbursement groups will be paid for their
registered screening and brief intervention activities. Payment depends on normal country specific fees and rates for financial reimbursement forclinical preventive activities.
4. e-BI: In addition to receiving the same package as the control group, the e-BI group will be asked to refer identified at risk patients with an e-
leaflet with unique log in codes to an approved e-BI specific package, which will be country specific, or, for Poland based on the WHO e-SBI
program. The website should include the following: Log-in facility to allow monitoring of the patient ( i.e., patient actually log-in); suitable brief
screening tool with ability to calculate score and give feedback ( i.e., brief intervention); appropriate information on sensible drinking guidelines;
information on impact of alcohol on health and wellbeing; and a drink diary facility. Furthermore, the website could offer reminder facilities for
follow-up activity.
5. T&S and financial reimbursement: The T&S and financial reimbursement group will receive the package, T&S, and the financial reimbursement as
described above.
6. T&S and e-BI: The T&S and e-BI group will receive the package, T&S as above, and will be asked to refer identified at risk patients to e-BI as above.7. Financial reimbursement and e-BI: The financial reimbursement and e-BI group will receive the package and will be asked to refer identified at risk
patients to e-BI as above. They will be paid for screening, referral performance to e-BI, and brief advice if actually delivered, with the system of
pay as above.
8. T&S, financial reimbursement and e-BI: The T&S, financial reimbursement and e-BI group will receive the package and T&S as above. They will be
asked to refer identified at risk patients to e-BI as above. They will be paid for screening, brief advice activities, and referral performance to e-BI ,
with the system of pay as above.Keurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11 Page 5 of 7
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
month would be needed for a 80% chance of detecting an
increase in screening rates from 8% to 12% (ICC = 0.029)
and that 120 PHCUs (15 per eight allocation groups)would be needed for a 80% chance of detecting an in-
crease in brief advice rates from 4% to 6% (ICC = 0.029)
(alpha = 5%). As country is used as stratification criteriaeach country has to include a minimum of 24 PHCUs.
These conservative estimates are based on published evi-
dence of screening and advice rates [22,23].
Statistical methods
Because of the hierarchical stru cture of the data (individual
providers nested within PHCU nested within country), we
will perform multilevel analyses of the screening and advice
rates to examine the effect of the implementation strategiesin comparison with the controls. The intention to treat ana-
lyses will include all participating provi ders (see above). Per
protocol analyses will include only actively participatingproviders (see above). In all the analyses, we will use expos-
ure to the implementation strategy as co-variate. Exposure
is defined as positive if the providers meet the following cri-teria: financial —the PHCU received the financial reim-
bursement; e-BI —the provider handed out at least one
referral card; and T&S —the provider attended the two
face-to-face educational meetings. If these criteria will not
be met, the exposure will be defined as negative.
Analyses will be performed in SAS V9.2 and based on
mixed effects model (PROC GLIMMIX and PROC
MIXED). We will use a random intercept model with fixed
variables.
Discussion
By conducting this trial, we are trying to address thewell-known implementation gap (evidence to practice)
of screening and brief interventions for hazardous and
harmful alcohol consumption in PHC. For example,researchers rarely have been in a position to actively
compare a number of incentive-based strategies. With
this trial, we aim to assist in building a knowledge base,on which policy could be based on.
We are aware of some strengths and limitations of this
trial. This trial is approached pragmatically. In otherwords, each of the five countries differs slightly in the im-
plementation strategy contents. For example, countries
will differ in their distribution of research fees, amount offinancial reimbursements, and deliverers of training and
support strategies. The research team explicitly deter-
mined this pragmatic approach, because they consideredthis approach being most valuable for country policy
makers. Albeit, in terms of research, this is less powerful
because there are small variations in implementation strat-egies per country.
The five participating countries are different in their
organization of primary care and have different drinkingpatterns. This creates opportunities to conduct across-
country analyses and relate different implementation
rate outcomes to cultural and organizational differences.These results can consequently be applicable through
Europe and other similar Western countries. In the fu-
ture, if our implementation strategies result in improvedscreening and brief intervention rates, other countries
with comparable primary care systems could use these
strategies to improve the prevention of hazardous andharmful alcohol consumption in their country.
Additional file
Additional file 1: Graphical depiction of ODHIN study. This image
graphically describes the way ODHIN is designed. It makes a distinctionbetween procedure activities, measures and implementation strategies.It also gives an insight of time schedule of depicted activities.
Abbreviations
e-BI: Internet based brief interventions; PHC: Primary healthcare;
PHCU: Primary healthcare unit; SAAPPQ: Short Alcohol and AlcoholPerceptions Questionnaire; T&S: Training and support.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
MK, PA, and ML wrote the first draft of the manuscript and all other authors
revised the manuscript critically. PB, FS, and PA were responsible for theoriginal set up of the study design, which has further been discussed with allauthors during three meetings. The final and in this paper presented design
is the outcome of these discussions and written comments of all authors. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The research leading to these results or outcomes has received funding from
the European Community ’s Seventh Framework Program (FP7/2007-2013),
under Grant Agreement nº 259268 –Optimizing delivery of healthcare
intervention (ODHIN). Participant organisations in ODHIN can be seen at:
www.odhinproject.eu.
Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre received co-funding from TheNetherlands Organisation for Health Research and Development (ZonMW,Prevention Program), under Grant Agreement nº 200310017 –ODHIN –
Optimizing delivery of healthcare interventions in the Netherlands, according
Art.II.17 of the FP7 EC Grant Agreement.The following individuals were part of the WP5 ODHIN group, besides theauthors of this study protocol: Begoña Baena (Spain), Amy Wolstenholme
(UK) , Marcin Wojnar (Poland), Katarzyna Okulicz- Kozaryn (Poland), Krzysztof
Brzózka (Poland), Luiza Slodownik (Poland), Gaby Ronda (Netherlands), Trudyvan der Weijden (Netherlands), Michel Wensing (Netherlands).
Author details
1Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Scientific Institute for Quality
of Healthcare (IQ healthcare), P.O. Box 9101, 114 IQ healthcare, 6500 HBNijmegen, The Netherlands.
2Institute of Health and Society, Medical Faculty,
Baddiley-Clark Building, Richardson Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4AX,
United Kingdom.3Department of Social medicine, University of Gothenburg,
P.O. Box 453, 405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.4Department of Medicine and
Health, Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, Sweden.5Program on
Substance Abuse, Public Health Agency, Government of Catalonia, Barcelona,
Spain.6Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Addictions Unit, Institut Clínic de
Neurosciències, C/Villarroel 170, CP 08036 Barcelona, Spain.7Addictions
Department, National Addiction Centre, Institute of Psychiatry, King ’s College
London, 4 Windsor Walk, London SE5 8BB, UK.8Department of General
Practice, Maastricht University, School CAPHRI, P.O Box 616, 6200 MD,Maastricht, The Netherlands.
9Independent Laboratory of Family PhysicianKeurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11 Page 6 of 7
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
Education, Pomeranian Medical University in Szczecin, ul. Rybacka 1, 70-204,
Szczecin, Poland.10Department of Primary Care and Population Health,
University College London, London, UK.
Received: 18 November 2012 Accepted: 22 January 2013
Published: 24 January 2013
References
1. WHO Regional Office for Europe: In Alcohol in the European Union.
Consumption, harm and policy approaches . Edited by Anderson P, Møller L,
Galea G. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe; 2012.
2. Anderson P, Cremona A, Paton A, Turner C, Wallace P: The risk of alcohol.
Addiction 1993, 88:1493–1508.
3. Anderson P (Ed): Alcohol and risks of physical harm . Oxford: Oxford Medical
Publications; 1995.
4. Anderson P, Baumberg B: Alcohol in Europe . London: Institute of Alcohol
Studies; 2006.
5. University of Sheffield: Prevention and early identification of alcohol use
disorders in adults and young people. Final draft of Report 2 to the National
Institute for Health & Clinical Excellence . Sheffield: University of Sheffield:
School of Health and Related Research (ScHARR); 2009.
6. Fleming MF, Mundt MP, French MT, Manwell LB, Stauffacher EA, KL B: Brief
physician advice for problem drinkers: long-term efficacy and benefit-
cost analysis. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 2002, 26:36–43.
7. Anderson P: The effectiveness of general practitioners ’advice in
reducing the risk of alcohol .I nPrevention of Cardiovascular Disease: An
evidence-based approach , Volume 2nd. Edited by Lawrence M, Neil A,
Fowler G, Mant D. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1996.
8. Babor T, Higgins-Biddle J: Alcohol screening and brief intervention:
dissemination strategies for medical practice and public health. Addiction
2000, 95:677–686.
9. Fleming MF, Mundt MP, French MT, Manwell LB, Stauffacher EA, KL B:
Benefit-cost analysis of brief physician advice with problem drinkers in
primary care settings. Med Care 2000, 38:7–18.
10. Kaner EF, Beyer F, Dickinson HO, Pienaar E, Campbell F, Schlesinger C,
Heather N, Saunders J, Burnand B: Effectiveness of brief alcohol
interventions in primary care populations. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2007, 18:CD004148.
11. Lock CA, Kaner E, Heather N, Doughty J, Crawshaw A, McNamee P, Purdy S,
Pearson P: Effectiveness of nurse-led brief alcohol intervention: a cluster
randomized controlled trial. J Adv Nurs 2006, 54:426–439.
12. Reiff-Hekking S, Ockene JK, Hurley TG, Reed GW: Brief physician and nurse
practitioner-delivered counseling for high-risk drinking. Results
at 12-month follow-up. J Gen Intern Med 2005, 20:7–13.
13. Moyer A, Finney J, Swearingen C, Vergun P: Brief interventions for alcohol
problems: a meta-analytic review of controlled investigations in
treatment-seeking and non-treatment-seeking populations. Addiction
2002, 97:279–292.
14. Stead LF, Bergson G, Lancaster T: Physician advice for smoking cessation.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008, 2:CD000165.
15. Anderson P: Overview of interventions to enhance primary-care provider
management of patients with substance-use disorders. Drug Alcohol Rev
2009, 28:567–574.
16. Nilsen P: Brief alcohol intervention –where to from here? Challenges
remain for research and practice. Addiction 2010, 105:954–959.
17. Kaner EF, Wutzke S, Saunders JB, Powell A, Morawski J, JC; B, Group WBIS:
Impact of alcohol education and training on general practitioners ’
diagnostic and management skills: findings from a World Health
Organization collaborative study. J Stud Alcohol 2001, 62:621–627.
18. Wilson G, Lock C, Heather N, Cassidy P, Christie M, Kaner E: Intervention
against excessive alcohol consumption in primary health care: a survey
of GPs ’attitudes and practices in England ten years on. Alcohol Alcohol
2011, 46:570–577.
19. Anderson P, Kaner E, Wutzke S, Funk M, Heather N, Wensing M, Grol R, Gual
A, Pas L: Attitudes and managing alcohol problems in general practice:
an interaction analysis based on findings from a WHO Collaborative
Study. Alcohol Alcohol 2004, 39:351–356.
20. Roche AM, Freeman T: Brief interventions: good in theory but weak in
practice. Drug Alcohol Rev 2004, 23:11–18.21. Laurant M, Reeves D, Hermens R, Braspenning J, Grol R, Sibbald B:
Substitution of doctors by nurses in primary care. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev2005, 2:CD001271.
22. Funk M, Wutzke S, Kaner E, Anderson P, Pas L, McCormick R, Gual A, Barfod
S:A multi country controlled trial of strategies to promote dissemination
and implementation of brief alcohol intervention in primary health care:
Findings of a WHO Collaborative Study. J Stud Alcohol 2005, 66:379.
23. van Beurden I, Anderson P, Akkermans RP, Grol RP, Wensing M, Laurant MG:
Involvement of general practitioners in managing alcohol problems:
a randomised controlled trial of a tailored improvement programme.
Addiction 2012, 107:1601–1611.
24. Nilsen P, Aalto M, Bendtsen P, Seppa K: Effectiveness of strategies to
implement brief alcohol intervention in primary healthcare. A systematic
review. Scand J Prim Health Care 2006, 24:5–15.
25. Scott A, Sivey P, Ait Ouakrim D, Willenberg L, Naccarella L, Furler J, Young D:
The effect of financial incentives on the quality of health care provided
by primary care physicians. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2011, 9:CD008451.
26. van CE D: Changing the GP payment system: Do financial incentives
matter? InPhD thesis . Nivel: Tilburg University; 2012.
27. An LC, Bluhm JH, Foldes SS, Alesci NL, Klatt CM, Center BA, Nersesian WS,
Larson ME, Ahluwalia JS, MW M: A randomized trial of a pay-for-
performance program targeting clinician referral to a state tobacco
quitline. Arch Intern Med 2008, 168:1993–1999.
28. Riper H, Spek V, Boon B, Conijn B, Kramer J, Martin-Abello K, F S:
Effectiveness of E-Self-help interventions for curbing adult problem
drinking: a meta-analysis. J Med Internet Res 2011, 13:e42.
29. Spek V, Cuijpers P, Nyklicek I, Riper H, Keyzer J, Pop V: Internet-based
cognitive behaviour therapy for symptoms of depression and anxiety:
a meta-analysis. Psychol Med 2007, 37:319–328.
30. Kaner E, Lock C, Heather N, McNamee P, Bond S: Promoting brief alcohol
intervention by nurses in primary care: a cluster randomised controlled
trial. Patient Educ Couns 2003, 51:277–284.
31. Israel Y, Hollander O, Sanchez-Craig M, Booker S, Miller V, Gingrich R, Rankin
JG:Screening for problem drinking and counseling by the primary care
physician-nurse team. Alcohol Clin Exp Res 1996, 20:1443–1450.
32. Bradley KA, DeBenedetti AF, Volk RJ, Williams EC, Frank D, Kivlahan DR:
AUDIT-C as a brief screen for alcohol misuse in primary care. Alcohol Clin
Exp Res 2007, 31:1208–1217.
33. Anderson P, Gual A, Colom J: Alcohol and Primary Health Care: Clinical
Guidelines on Identification and Brief Interventions . Barcelona: Department of
Health of the Government of Catalonia; 2005.
34. Anderson P, Clement S: The AAPPQ Revisited: the measurement of
general practitioner ’s attitudes to alcohol problems. Addiction 1987,
82:753–759.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-11
Cite this article as: Keurhorst et al. :Implementing training and support,
financial reimbursement, and referral to an internet-based brief advice
program to improve the early identification of hazardous and harmful
alcohol consumption in primary care (ODHIN): study protocol for a
cluster randomized factorial trial. Implementation Science 2013 8:11.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitKeurhorst et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:11 Page 7 of 7
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/11
