Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Moving adolescents for a lifetime of physical
activity: shifting to interventions aligned with the
third health revolution
Jay Kimiecik, Thelma Horn, Tarkington J. Newman & Carlyn M Kimiecik
To cite this article:  Jay Kimiecik, Thelma Horn, Tarkington J. Newman & Carlyn M Kimiecik
(2020) Moving adolescents for a lifetime of physical activity: shifting to interventions
aligned with the third health revolution, Health Psychology Review, 14:4, 486-503, DOI:
10.1080/17437199.2019.1700820
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1700820
Published online: 19 Dec 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 595
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 5 View citing articles 

Moving adolescents for a lifetime of physical activity: shifting to
interventions aligned with the third health revolution
Jay Kimiecika, Thelma Horna, Tarkington J. Newmanband Carlyn M Kimiecikc
aDepartment of Kinesiology and Health, Miami University, Oxford, OH, USA;bDepartment of Social Work,
University of New Hampshire, Durham, NH, USA;cDepartment of Health and Kinesiology, Purdue University,
West Lafayette, IN, USA
ABSTRACT
Public health advocates have been calling for an intensi ﬁed focus on early,
middle, and late adolescence health behaviours due to both the short- and
long-term health consequences. Hence, both the health-risk (e.g., alcohol
consumption) and health-promoting (e.g., physical activity) behaviours
of adolescents have been widely studied to better understand the
underlying causes or determinants with an eye towards implementing
more e ﬀective interventions. The success of these interventions, typically
grounded in a risk-reduction/prevention-oriented intervention approach
has been modest, especially those focused on health-promoting
behaviours, such as physical activity. The purposes of this paper are to
(1) conduct a conceptual critique of the risk-reduction/prevention-
oriented approach underlying traditional adolescent physical activityinterventions, and (2) examine the potential usefulness of an emerging
person-based, development-oriented (PBDO) approach for enhancing
the motivation and sustainability of adolescent physical activity. Within
this PBDO perspective, emphasis is on adolescent growth and
development as the starting point for initiating and sustaining physicalactivity. Implications of the PBDO approach for adolescent physical
activity interventions are presented.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 22 September 2019
Accepted 10 November 2019
KEYWORDS
Prevention; development;physical activity; adolescent;intervention; well-being
Adolescents have been a focal point of public health promotion as data from multiple sources
suggest they are on a high-risk health behavioural trajectory for future chronic degenerative diseases
and poor health outcomes (Mulye et al., 2009 ; Park, Scott, Adams, Brindis, & Irwin, 2014 ). Typically,
these behaviours are categorised as health-risk (e.g., tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use) or
health-promoting (e.g., physical activity and nutritious eating). Although there is certainly inter-
dependence between and common causes of health-risk and health-promoting behaviours (Flay,2002 ), the focus of this paper is on adolescent health-promoting behaviours with primary emphasis
on physical activity, and, to a much lesser extent, dietary intake. These two health-promoting beha-viours are often linked together. For example, sedentary adolescents have a lower consumption offruits and vegetables than their physically active peers (Pearson & Biddle, 2011 ). The signi ﬁcant
role of physical activity in adolescent health has sparked many interventions focused on decreasingsedentary behaviour and/or increasing movement. Thus, the primary purposes of this conceptual
review are to (1) critique the philosophy and e ﬀectiveness of the traditional approach to adolescent
physical activity interventions, and (2) based on that critique, discuss emerging ideas about adoles-cent development that show promise for enhancing the sustainable impact of future physical activity
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Jay Kimiecik kimiecjc@miamioh.eduHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW
2020, VOL. 14, NO. 4, 486 –503
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1700820
interventions for this age group. At times in the paper, we use the broader terms ‘youth ’and‘young
people ’where appropriate, but the primary emphasis is on adolescents (ages 10 –19).
Results from epidemiological research demonstrate strong relationships among regular physical
activity, healthy eating, and the prevention of chronic diseases including heart disease, cancer,
and stroke (Lichtenstein et al., 2006 ). Identi ﬁed as an ‘epidemic ’, obesity is a major risk factor for
chronic disease and is associated with physical activity levels and food intake (Institute of Medicine,
2009 ). For adolescents aged 12– 19 years, the prevalence of obesity has tripled since 1970, and for
young people ages 6 –19 nearly one in ﬁve are obese (Fryar, Carroll, & Ogden, 2014 ; Hales, Carroll,
Fryar, & Ogden, 2017 ). This is signi ﬁcant because youth obesity tends to track into adulthood
(Hayes, Dowd, MacDonncha, & Donnelly, 2019 ) and carries a heightened risk of immediate and
future chronic diseases (e.g., cardiovascular disease, musculoskeletal disorders, type-2 diabetes,
osteoarthritis, and several types of cancer) (O ﬃce of the Surgeon General, 2010 ; Panday, 2017 ).
What is most concerning is that many of these health issues can develop earlier than adulthood inobese or overweight youth (Panday, 2017 ).
Much of the exponential increase in obesity rates can be attributed to physical inactivity among
youth (Janssen et al., 2005 ), and, unfortunately, the greatest lifespan decline in physical activity occurs
during adolescence. Adolescent physical activity decreases up to seven percent per year between theages of 9 –15 years (Brodersen, Steptoe, Boniface, & Wardle, 2007 ; Dumith, Gigante, Domingues, &
Kohl, 2011 ). Sixty-two percent of children aged 9 –13 years do not participate in any organised phys-
ical activity during non-school hours, and 22.6% do not engage in any free-time physical activity(Duke, Huhman, & Heitzler, 2003 ). Further, data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination
Survey and National Youth Fitness Survey indicate that 75.2% of youth do not engage in moderate-to-vigorous physical activity for at least 60 minutes daily (Fakhouri et al., 2014 ). These physical activity
rates continue to decrease as adolescents move into young or emerging adulthood (Strong, Parks,
Anderson, Winett, & Davy, 2008 ). Similarly, adolescent fruit and vegetable intake is low. Results
from the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) indicate approximately nine percent and two percent
of high school students meet daily fruit and vegetable recommendations, respectively (Moore,
Thompson, & Demissie, 2017 ).
As such, according to Park et al. ( 2014 ), the quality of adolescent health ‘shows little to no progress
on most key measures ’(p 12). Pertaining to the two health-promoting behaviours of interest in this
paper, data indicate that millions of adolescents are not moving their bodies on a regular basis nor
eating healthy foods at the recommended levels (U.S Department of Health and Human Services andU.S. Department of Agriculture, 2015 ). The situation is especially worrisome since these two beha-
viours are established in childhood (Anderssen, Wold, & Torsheim, 2005 ), track into adulthood
(Hayes et al., 2019 ), and tend to cluster as a pattern (Jago et al., 2004 ).
Paper ’s paradigmatic focus
The health behaviour trends highlighted in the previous section suggest that focused interventions
from multiple sources are needed to help adolescents become interested in and sustain physical
activity across the lifespan (Perry, Garside, Morones, & Hayman, 2012 ). This paper takes a bigger
picture view as to why many well-intentioned interventions to date have been relatively ine ﬀective
in enhancing adolescent physical activity. We propose that a conceptual shift in perspective could
make adolescent-based interventions more e ﬀective in fostering sustainable physical activity. It is
not our intent to conduct a systematic or comprehensive review of interventions designed to
promote adolescent physical activity, as this has been done quite well by others (e.g., Biddle, O ’Con-
nell, & Braithwaite, 2011 ; Kriemler et al., 2011 ; Metcalf, Henley, & Wilkin, 2012 ). Rather, our primary
focus is on the meta or paradigmatic foundations underlying physical activity interventions.
A paradigm is a broad system of beliefs and values that directs both science and practice (Overton,
2015 ). Paradigms are slow to shift and when they do, the new paradigm typically includes terms and
concepts from the replaced paradigm but they are seen in new or novel ways (Kuhn, 1970 ). ForHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 487
example, Copernicus was called mad because he deemed earth as moving (new paradigm) rather
thanﬁxed (traditional paradigm). Scientists and practitioners are guided by paradigms –ways of
believing and thinking –and see and do things in certain ways as a result of these views. Paradigm
shifts occur when the dominant paradigm reaches crisis or can no longer solve the problems forwhich it was created (Ekkekakis, 2017 ). Initially, there can be resistance to developing or emerging
paradigms because sometimes the new concepts or way of viewing the world may not initially
help ‘at all with the problems that evoked the crisis ’(Kuhn, 1970 , p. 154).
Existing paradigm: risk-reduction, prevention-oriented approach
We begin with the supposition that the majority of adolescent physical activity interventions have
utilized a disease-risk reduction/prevention-oriented approach embedded within a biomedical para-
digm. This is to be expected in that the biomedical paradigm has dominated medicine for centuries
and recent public health-promotion practices have followed suit (Antonovsky, 1996 ; Ekkekakis, 2017 ;
Kimiecik, 2011 ,2016 ). Emerging from the Cartesian revolution, the biomedical way of thinking is
mechanistic, based in instrumental reasoning, characterising organisms as inherently stable, ﬁxed,
rational, and predictable (Capra, 1982 ; Overton, 2015 ). Max Weber referred to instrumental reasoning
as a pattern of thinking focused on world mastery via the precise calculation of adequate means (see
Buchanan, 2000 for further explanation). Within the health context, the biomedical model became
dominant in Western society and led to what Breslow ( 2004 ) termed the ﬁrst health revolution in
the middle of the nineteenth century to combat the spread of communicable diseases via vaccinesand social change.
The second health revolution occurred in the middle of the twentieth century and involved a bio-
medical approach to reducing premature mortality due to chronic degenerative diseases, such asheart disease. Expensive technological intervention and expert-based healthy living guidelines
were the primary means of intervention. The biomedical model served its purpose in leadingthese two revolutions by contributing to the eradication or reduction of both communicable and
chronic degenerative diseases, at least in the Western world. Breslow argues that the current situation
now calls for a third revolution –building health as a resource for everyday life –in which people
desire something beyond being free of disease, such as having the capability to do what one
wants to do in life and resisting forces that impede that inner imperative. Breslow suggests that
this third health revolution could be transformative for individuals and society and has already com-menced without many healthcare professionals recognising it as such.
Limits of risk-reduction/prevention-oriented approach
Within the third revolution, approaches to health entrenched in the biomedical model have somesevere limitations. In a Cartesian/biomedical worldview, behaviours such as physical activity are con-sidered lifestyle-based risk factors for a variety of chronic degenerative diseases. Prevention via
adherence is central to this disease-based model of health (i.e., get adolescents to adhere to
regular physical activity to reduce their risk factors and prevent disease). Katzmarzyk ( 2010 ) has
suggested that allegiance to this ‘existing paradigm ’, with its focus on biomedically-based guidelines
for physical activity, has created ‘pandemic paradigm paralysis ’with a rush to increase levels of phys-
ical activity and the ‘widespread inability to envision alternative or new models of thinking ’(p. 2717).
He proposes a shift to a physical inactivity paradigm and novel ways to ‘reduce widespread exposure
to sedentary behaviors ’(p. 2723). Although this could be a paradigm shift, we suggest that this per-
spective still falls within a biomedical paradigm of changing certain behaviours (sedentary) within arisk factor/disease prevention approach.
Capra ( 1982 ) and others (e.g., Antonovsky, 1996 ; Buchanan, 2000 ; Kimiecik, 2011 ; Kimiecik &
Lawson, 1996 ) claim that the risk-reduction/prevention approach views the body as a machine.
Disease, which is de ﬁned as a disruption in the body ’s biological processes, is divorced from emotions488 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
and spirit. Thus, thefocus of the biomedical model is on ﬁxing what is wrong with the body (treat-
ment) and/or on identifying ways to circumvent disease development (prevention). As an
example, within the ﬁeld of developmental science this model spawned prevention science (Cata-
lano, Hawkins, Berglund, Pollard, & Arthur, 2002 ), which focused largely on targeting risk factors
and emphasising deﬁ cits in youth. According to Catalano and colleagues, most prevention science
interventions limit their focus to individual-level change and one or two risk factors, ignoring rela-
tional or holistic patterns between individuals, groups, context, and behaviours. The same could
be said for biomedically-driven physical activity interventions. Physical activity and diet have beenidentiﬁed as major modi ﬁable disease agents along with environmental determinants (Bouchard,
Blair, & Haskell, 2012 ). Hence, scientists and practitioners operating within this belief system have
attempted to ﬁnd ways to change people ’s (of all ages) physical activity behaviour to help them
delay or avoid the onset of chronic-degenerative disease (King, Stokols, Talen, Brassington, & Killings-
worth, 2002 ). Importantly, the initial focus is on the behaviour rather than the person. This starting
point is a signi ﬁcantﬂaw as Ekkekakis ( 2017 , p. 85) suggests that ‘possibly more than any other
health behaviour, physical activity is disconnected from the awareness of its health bene ﬁts’.
Interventions driven by the biomedical model tend to adopt prescriptive approaches to physical
activity based on guidelines continually revised and updated by expert-based organisations, such
as the CDC and American College of Sports Medicine (Ekkekakis, 2009 ,2017 ). Although these
guidelines for physical activity have changed over the years (see Pate, 2012 ), the primary focus
is on how much is enough (i.e., frequency, intensity, duration) for reducing risk of disease (U.S.Department of Health and Human Services, 2018 ). This way of thinking has kept health and
ﬁtness promotion in the dominant mode of disease prevention (Antonovsky, 1996 ; Kimiecik,
2011 ; Segar & Richardson, 2014 ). Within this prevention science context (Kurtines et al., 2008 ), treat-
ing the adolescent as a rational object comprised of distinct lifestyle-based risk factors for disease
needing to be changed lead to fragmented behavioural interventions designed to ﬁx what ’s
missing (Reyna & Farley, 2007 ). That is, this risk and protective factors approach (Schwartz,
Pantin, Coatsworth, & Szapocznik, 2007 ) assumes that adolescents are missing some key social,
physical, and cognitive skills and once they acquire these they will be less likely to smoke, use
illicit drugs, binge drink alcohol, or partake in unsafe sex. Ekkekakis ( 2017 ; Ekkekakis & Zenko,
2016 ) has labelled this approach the rational educational model and suggests that the ﬁeld of
public health is in a paradigmatic crisis as a result of the model ’s failed application to exercise
behaviour change. Generally, interventions grounded in these biomedical, prevention-oriented,rational educational models have demonstrated limited eﬀ ectiveness in the short-term and
further decreases in sustainable health behaviour change after six months to a year (Burt, 2002 ;
Jackson, Geddes, Haw, & Frank, 2011 ;
Reyna & Farley, 2007 ).
Similarly, multiple systematic reviews of child, adolescent, and youth physical activity interven-
tions (e.g., Biddle, Petrolini, & Pearson, 2014 ; Kriemler et al., 2011 ; Marcus et al., 2006 ; Metcalf et al.,
2012 ; Rhodes, Janssen, Bredin, Warburton, & Bauman, 2017 ; van Sluijs, McMinn, & Gri ﬃn,2008 ) con-
clude that such interventions have had modest behavioural e ﬀects. Metcalf et al. ( 2012 ) note: ‘strong
evidence …shows that physical activity interventions have little eﬀ ect on the overall activity of chil-
dren ’(p. 6). For youth, Rhodes et al. ( 2017 ) summarise ‘intervention e ﬀectiveness as inconclusive ’
(p. 959). Even in one of the reviews that concludes the studies were generally eﬀ ective (Kriemler
et al., 2011 ), the authors highlight a major problem: ‘establishing the sustainability of these interven-
tions and their e ﬀects as well as transferring these programmes into real-world settings ’(p. 929).
These reviewers, along with Biddle et al. ( 2011 ), observe that intervention e ﬀect sizes are small
and little is known about sustaining long-term change. For instance, studies demonstrating increasesin adolescent physical activity within the school day have not generalised to physical activity outsideof the school setting (Haerens, De Bourdeaudhuij, Maes, Cardon, & Deforche, 2007 ; Love, Adams, &
van Sluijs, 2019 ; Marcus et al., 2006 ; van Sluijs et al., 2008 ).
Adolescent physical activity interventions within a biomedical paradigm –disease prevention
through the adoption of and adherence to physical activity –typically use various social-cognitive,HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 489
educational, or environmental adaptation strategies to change behaviour (Ekkekakis & Zenko, 2016 ).
For example, school-based interventions have focused on such strategies as enhancing the quantity
and quality of physical education via health education, physical activity breaks, providing more
equipment (e.g., pedometers), after-school ﬁtness and sport programmes, and computer-tailored
feedback to enhance motivation (e.g., Sutherland et al., 2016 ). As indicated, the results of these
studies in terms of sustainable behaviour change appear to be quite modest (Love et al., 2019 ). Cer-
tainly, conducting intervention research with youth is challenging (Sutherland et al., 2016 ), but from a
paradigmatic perspective such risk-reduction/prevention-oriented approaches within a rational edu-
cational model to behaviour change may be limited within Breslow ’s notion of a third health revolu-
tion. Thus, the take away from these reviews of hundreds of child and adolescent physical activityinterventions is that at the very least novel perspectives could be integrated into this work toalign with the third revolution of health, re ﬂecting adolescents ’goals, desires, and ways of experien-
cing health as a resource for everyday living.
In sum, many of the physical activity interventions targeting adolescents are implemented within
a biomedical paradigm. This is not too surprising in that it has been suggested that risk reduction and
disease prevention models continue to dominate public health promotion and are more deeply
entrenched in both research and practice than ever (Nettleton, 2006 ). As such, this biomedical world-
view could be limiting intervention impact on the lives of adolescents due to misalignment with the
third health revolution. Similar to medicine in which the patient-as-human-being has been neglected
over many years (Ghane & Sweeny, 2013 ), the adolescent ’sexperience of physical activity has been
minimised. Table 1 summarises key elements of a risk-reduction, prevention-oriented approach in
comparison to a person-based, development-oriented approach, which will be introduced and dis-cussed in more depth in the next section. We are not suggesting that researchers conductingthese very well-intentioned, high quality physical activity interventions consciously assume that ado-
lescents have behavioural deﬁ cits (Starting Point) or need ﬁxing (Primary Assumption). But
embedded in a paradigm are values, beliefs, and cultural practices that shape and direct points of
Table 1. Comparison of adolescent physical activity intervention approaches.
Risk-reduction, prevention-oriented Person-based, development-oriented
Origins .Cartesian philosophy
.Biomedical model.Humanistic psychology
.Positive psychology
.Positive youth development
.Applied developmental science
Starting point .Deﬁcit-based
.What is wrong with you?
.Behaviour-focused.Growth-based
.What is right about you?
.Person-focused
Primary
assumptionAdolescents are rational objects and interventions are
needed to ﬁx personal troublesAdolescents have an inherent agency to be directed
towards positive well-being and health behaviours
Emphasis Deterrence: Physical activity is a means for disease
risk-reduction and prevention of unhealthy
outcomesDevelopment: Experiencing core life goods leads to
more sustainable healthy behaviours (e.g., physicalactivity)
Professional
roleExpert with behaviour-speci ﬁc knowledge Collaborator with broad interest in positive well-being
experiences
Change
processOne-size- ﬁts-all prescriptive programmes that seek to
change thoughts, and feelings presumed to beconnected to targeted behaviourProvide autonomy-supportive environments to
enhance self-discovery and self-expressionexperiences leading to identi ﬁcation of unique gifts
and core passion
Limitations
.Too Simple
.Behaviour without meaning
. ‘Can ’t see Forest for the Trees ’.Too complex
.Meaning without behaviour
. ‘Can ’t see Trees for the Forest ’490 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
view, thinking, and doing without people necessarily being consciously aware of these guiding forces
(Bargh, 2014 ; Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2014 ). To highlight this point, the late novelist David Foster
Wallace (Krajeski, 2008 ) began his commencement speech at Kenyon College with a story about ﬁsh:
There are these two young ﬁsh swimming along, and they happen to meet an older ﬁsh swimming the other way,
who nods at them and says, ‘Morning, boys, how ’s the water? ’And the two young ﬁsh swim on for a bit, and then
eventually one of them looks over at the other and goes, ‘What the hell is water? ’
As Wallace goes on to explain, the most obvious realities are the most di ﬃcult to see when operating
within a dominant paradigm; we are not always aware of the water in which we are swimming or howit may in ﬂuence our approaches to and design of research and practice. Kuhn ( 1970 ) argues that
when a ﬁeld reaches crisis or experiences anomalies, novel approaches begin to appear causing a
blurring of the dominant paradigm; a transition period develops, and, ultimately, a reconstructionof views and approaches takes place forming a new paradigm.
Emerging paradigm: person-based, development-oriented approach
The primary catalyst for this paper comes from data that demonstrate interventions targeting ado-lescent physical activity have been minimally eﬀ ective. Perhaps crisis is too strong but certainly
there appears to be a pattern of results that is much less than desired. From a metatheory perspec-tive, the primary paradigm within which these interventions are conducted could be a reason fortheir limited impact. In this section, we present some ideas grounded in an emerging paradigm
that may provide promise and possibility for future intervention work relating to adolescent physical
activity. We do not claim ownership of this perspective as we have synthesised ideas from a variety ofsources. Further, we acknowledge that our biases lead us to believe that a paradigm transition is
underway in the area of youth development –whether this shift will integrate with, supplement,
or replace present approaches to adolescent physical activity interventions, only time will tell. Our
main intent in this section is to provoke thought and discussion relating to how we go about
helping adolescents with their well-being and health behaviours, focusing primarily on physical
activity.
Person-based, development-oriented approach
We begin with the observation that the meaning of human behaviour has been largely ignored within
a risk-reduction, prevention-oriented approach to health behaviour change across all age groups(Ekkekakis, 2009 ; Kimiecik, 2010 ; Segar & Richardson, 2014 ). According to some writers, even ‘psychol-
ogy has neglected experience for the sake of behavior ’(Csikszentmihalyi, 1982 , p. 13). Of course,
meaningfulness is very subjective (Heintzelman & King, 2013 ). Within a Cartesian/biomedical para-
digm that emphasises the body, behaviour, reductionism, and eﬃciency, subjective experience oran individual ’s inner life is considered too complex, too subjective, or irrelevant for inclusion in
change processes. Following this rational model, any intervention within the risk-reduction, preven-tion-oriented approach begins and ends with the behaviour (e.g., physical activity, dietary intake,smoking cessation, etc.). And yet meaning –based on one ’s inner experience –has been shown
to play a very signiﬁ cant role in people ’s behaviours across many di ﬀerent contexts, such as econ-
omics and health (e.g., Karlsson, Lowenstein, & McCa ﬀerty, 2004 ; Segar & Richardson, 2014 ). A rel-
evant example comes from a study adopting a narrative approach to understanding adolescent
girls’physical activity (Knowles, Niven, & Fawkner, 2014 ). In analysing the stories of 14 girls, the
authors conclude that their physical activity experiences and embodied processes underlie the
relationship between psychological processes and physical activity behaviour and choices.
At the dawn of the new millennium, Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi ( 2000 ) wrote a seminal piece
formalising positive subjective experience into the ﬁeld of positive psychology in which they recog-
nised that building competency, not correcting weakness or de ﬁcits, was where ‘major strides ’inHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 491
fostering health and well-being would occur. They called for a science of ‘human strength whose
mission will be to understand and learn how to foster these virtues in young people ’(p. 7). Since
that time, many scholars and disciplines have attempted to answer this call, leading to a multitude
of perspectives and practices. For instance, positive psychology (PP), applied developmental science
(ADS), and positive youth development (PYD) are all models or approaches to human experienceunder the umbrella term of development . However, as Kuhn ( 1970 ) warned, developing paradigms
typically create a blurring or chaotic state. Thus, under the guise of youth development a varietyof similar terms have been utilised, many of which are not easily discernible.
Though explicitly and meticulously exploring the conceptual similarities and di ﬀerences of the PP,
ADS, and PYD approaches are beyond the scope of this paper, within each perspective terms such asthriving, ﬂourishing, developmental assets, and character strengths are assumed to be essential to
understanding the lives of all adolescents in varying life contexts (e.g., academic performance,
health behaviours). Brie ﬂy, as stated by Seligman and Csikszentmihalyi ( 2000 , p. 5), the aim of positive
psychology (PP) is ‘building positive qualities ’and is focused on ‘valued subjective experience ’.
Applied developmental science (ADS) assumes the ‘potential for change represents a fundamental
strength of human development ’across the lifespan (Lerner, Lerner, Bowers, & Geldhof, 2015 ,
p. 608). Over the last two decades within youth development, PYD has emerged as a new science
reﬂecting a more positive, holistic, and developmentally-based approach (Damon, 2004 ; Larson,
2000 ; Lerner, Phelps, Forman, & Bowers, 2009 ; Lerner et al., 2015 ). In fact, Hoyt, Chase-Lansdale,
McDade, and Adam ( 2012 ) have labelled this movement a paradigm shift, in which the focus has
moved from one of deterrence to that of development (see Table 1 ). Newman ( 2019 ) recently sum-
marised this reshu ﬄing in social work prevention and intervention science, stating that historically
‘the focus of youth research and programming was on ﬁxing broken youth through a problem-
focused approach ’as youth and their deﬁcits were viewed as problematic, social ills ‘who were
regarded as problems that had to be managed ’(p. 7). However, now PYD-based approaches are
often strengths-based, with the goal of supporting autonomy and promoting empowerment as away to enhance learning, growth, and development within a biopsychosocial framework.
Taken together, youth development is foundationally grounded in the idea of human plasticity.
This capacity to show systematic change within varying contexts is a key belief derived from ecologi-cal systems (Bronfenbrenner, 1995 ) as well as relational developmental systems (Overton, 2015 )
metatheories. These metatheories include the idea that, through dynamic bidirectional relationsbetween the individual and his/her environment, individuals are active producers of their own devel-opment (Lerner et al., 2015 ; Schwartz et al., 2007 ).
Therefore, while PP, ADS, and PYD have slightly di ﬀerent origins and emphases, for the
remainder of this paper we use the term person-based, development-oriented (PB
 DO) approach
as an umbrella term encompassing aspects from each of these perspectives for the purpose of
understanding and promoting healthy living in adolescents. Again, Table 1 highlights some of the
elements of a PBDO approach. Certainly, varying degrees of this approach are presently guiding
the science of adolescent health behaviour change (e.g., autonomy-supportive environments to
enhance adolescent physical activity). But in its purest paradigmatic form, PBDO always begins
with the person, not the behaviour. It is assumed that adolescents have an inherent agency to be
directed towards positive well-being (broadly de ﬁned), and that by developing and experiencing
core life goods (e.g., eudaimonia, self-determination, self-expression) will develop and sustainhealthy lifestyles. The subsequent two sections provide conceptual ideas and empirical evidence sup-porting a relationship between a PBDO approach and adolescent health-risk and health-promoting
behaviour.
PBDO approach and adolescent health-risk behavior
As summarised in Table 1 , a main assumption guiding PBDO work is that the promotion of inner
strengths, positive psychological functioning, or positive well-being of adolescents can prevent492 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
health-compromising and/or promote health-enhancing behaviours (Flay, 2002 ; Schwartz et al.,
2007 ). PBDO-based studies conducted to date provide some support for this claim, particularly in
regard to health-risk behaviours. For example, a study grounded in self-determination theory (SDT;
Deci & Ryan, 2000 ) demonstrated that adolescents with strong extrinsic aspirations or goals (e.g.,
image) were more likely than students with intrinsic goals (e.g., personal growth) to engage in
risk-oriented behaviours (Williams, Cox, Hedberg, & Deci, 2000 ). The ‘Five C ’s’(Schwartz et al.,
2010 ; Zimmerman, Phelps, & Lerner, 2008 ) of positive youth development –competence, con ﬁdence,
connection, character, and caring –have been found to delay initiation of substance use and sexual
activity. In a sample of emerging adults, eudaimonic well-being –positive life purpose and meaning –
was negatively related to frequency of marijuana use, inhalant use, prescription drug use, and ridingwith an impaired driver (Schwartz et al., 2011 ). Hoyt et al. ( 2012 ) found that positive well-being in
adolescence was strongly related to participation in less risky behaviours, including binge drinking,
cigarette smoking, marijuana use, and other illicit drug use in young adulthood.
From an intervention perspective, a systematic review by Jackson et al. ( 2011 ) found that PBDO-
based programmes, such as HealthWise (Caldwell et al., 2004 ) and Positive Action (Flay & Allred,
2010 ), were most promising in reducing multiple health-risk behaviours in young people. HealthWise
is a classroom-based programme that focuses on enhancing positive leisure life skills as a means to
reduce sexual risk reduction and substance abuse. The idea is to curb boredom by helping youth
develop leisure interests and make healthy, meaningful choices in one ’s free time (Smith et al.,
2008 ). Adolescents with the highest levels of leisure-related intrinsic motivation had the lowest
odds of partaking in health-risk behaviours (Caldwell, Patrick, Smith, Palen, & Wegner, 2010 ). Positive
Action is a comprehensive school- and community-based programme grounded in a broad theory of
self-concept that emphasises positive thoughts, feelings, and behaviours. Intervention studies overmany years have demonstrated a connection between character development and reduction in
health-risk behaviours, ranging from bullying to violence to smoking cessation (Flay & Allred, 2010 ;
Lewis et al., 2016 ).
In contrast to a risk-reduction/prevention-oriented intervention approach, these kinds of PBDO-
based interventions do not start with the notion of trying to change adolescents ’health-risk beha-
viours through health education and rational decision-making, although some PBDO approaches
include this as a component. Rather, the approach is more holistic and distal –starting with the
person, not the behaviour –focusing on individual strengths more so than de ﬁcits, and incorporating
positive well-being as a catalyst to growth and development leading to sustained behaviour change.Thus, PBDO-based programmes do not begin with an assumption that something is wrong with ado-
lescents or that they are weak or immoral to be attracted to health-compromising behaviours (Burt,
2002 ). Instead, the end goal is prevention of health-risk behaviours through the purported protection
or buﬀering of personal growth and development. This integrative approach is one that Schwartz
et al. ( 2007 ) suggest is possible due to overlap between deterrence and development.
In sum, evidence exists to support the PBDO approach for deterring adolescents ’participation in
health-compromising behaviours. But, as indicated at the beginning of this paper, physical inactivity
and low-quality diet are also major public health concerns that appear resistant to change. Can a
PBDO approach enhance adolescent physical activity and healthy eating?
PBDO approach and adolescent health-promoting behavior
Researchers have begun to examine the potential antecedent in ﬂuence of PBDO concepts, such as
thriving, ﬂourishing, or positive well-being, on adolescent as well as adult physical activity and
healthy eating behaviours (e.g., Boehm, Vie, & Kubzansky, 2012 ; Kimiecik & Horn, 2017 ). At the
most general or global level, a PBDO approach refers to the notion that each individual has a
central inner force that produces broad patterns of behaviours and experiences. Within this meta-
theoretical foundation, theoretical models or frameworks that incorporate these global, central ten-dencies do exist.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 493
Grounded in SDT, the hierarchical model of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation (Vallerand & Lalande,
2011 ) purports that global or general motivation, re ﬂecting broad dispositions, can be both a ﬀected
by and in ﬂuence contextual and situational motivation. This model incorporates reciprocity, that is,
global intrapersonal dispositions (e.g., autonomy) can impact situational a ﬀect, cognition, and
speciﬁc behaviours and vice versa (situational to global). In the hierarchical model, it is theorised
that compared to general or global motivation, contextual and speci ﬁc motivational orientations
are more reliably related to speci ﬁc health behaviours. One intervention study found support for
this relationship in that people who were more self-determined at a general level adopted a more
self-determined orientation (contextual) for healthy eating, and, in fact, reduced intake of total
dietary fat and saturated fat (Pelletier, Dion, Slovinec-D ’Angelo, & Reid, 2004 ).
The strength model of self-control (Hagger, Wood, Sti ﬀ, & Chatzisarantis, 2009 ) focuses on one’s
ability to exert control over the self and is conceptualised as a global, non-speci ﬁc resource. This
strength-energy model has demonstrated that a generalised level of self-control in ﬂuences physical
activity behaviour, and that enhancing self-regulation skill can increase physical activity behaviour
(Hagger et al., 2009 ). In addition, within the strength model, trait self-control –an individual ’s capacity
to exert self-control –has been shown to inﬂ uence healthy eating behaviour (Hankonen, Kinnunen,
Absetz, & Jallinoja, 2014 ). These results align with research demonstrating that people with enhanced
core executive functioning (e.g., selective attention) have greater self-regulation capacity and engage
in more healthful behaviours, including physical activity (Buckley, Cohen, Kramer, McAuley, &
Mullen, 2014 ).
Sonstroem ’s(1997 ) exercise and self-esteem model, which advocates reciprocal determinism of
speciﬁc to general aspects of the self, ranges from physical training to global self-esteem. Although
the dominant research approach based on this model has utilised a bottom-up perspective (exam-ination of the e ﬀects of physical activity on various aspects of the physical self), Sonstroem ( 1997 ,
p. 19) does note that global self-esteem is ‘a powerful determinant in people ’s behaviour. We tend
to act as our conception of self dictates to us ’. He suggests that this top-down relationship is particu-
larly strong with respect to self-esteem and participation in health-promoting behaviours. As men-
tioned earlier, the Positive Action programme is based on this relationship and its curriculum is
designed to foster a positive social-emotional, intellectual-, and physical-self (Flay & Allred, 2010 ).
A matched-pair, cluster-randomized controlled trial of youth in grades 3 –8 utilising this programme
revealed favourable programme e ﬀects on healthy eating and exercise (Bavarian et al., 2016 ).
At its extreme, the PBDO approach is based on the notion that if adolescents begin to feel better
about their lives in a holistic, general well-being sense (e.g., enhanced meaning and purpose) and
develop positive social-emotional skills, they will be more naturally attracted to, and likely to partici-
pate in, health-promoting behaviours (Bavarian et al., 2016 ; Boehm et al., 2012 ;
Kimiecik, 2010 ). Some
studies have examined the relationship between adolescents ’positive inner processes at a general
level and speci ﬁc health-promoting behaviours, such as physical activity and healthy eating. Carvajal
(2012 ) examined the predictive utility of adolescents ’global positive expectancies (GPE), operationa-
lised as dispositional optimism and hope, relating to their health-risk and health-enhancing beha-
viours. Higher initial levels of GPE predicted healthier food choices and greater physical activity
over time. Importantly, GPE did decrease over time suggesting the plasticity and changeability ofthese global expectancies in youth. In a prospective study, Hoyt et al. ( 2012 ) measured positive
well-being by asking adolescents a number of questions about themselves (e.g., level of happiness,hopefulness, life enjoyment). The researchers then examined the eﬀ ects of this positive well-being
composite over time on speci ﬁc health-risk and health-promoting behaviour and found that adoles-
cents who perceived positive well-being had a more positive health behaviour proﬁ le. Also, McDade
et al. ( 2011 ) demonstrated that adolescents who rated their chances to attend college exercised more
in early adulthood. What this research is beginning to reveal is that how adolescents feel about them-
selves plays a role in their health-promoting behaviour. In essence, the more that youth can be them-
selves and express and experience who they want to be, the more likely they will be motivated totake care of themselves and experience healthier outcomes (Kimiecik, 2016 ;R yﬀ& Singer, 2008 ).494 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
Healthy behaviours, such as eating fruits and vegetables each day and moving one ’s body regularly,
become more connected to one’ s purpose and meaning in a life well lived.
As these research studies suggest, the PBDO approach shows promise for enhancement of phys-
ical activity and healthy eating behaviours in adolescents. But what are the core inner processes of
this more general/distal approach that might guide adolescents to adopt and sustain thesehealth-promoting behaviours? Although space limits an in-depth discussion, Ry ﬀand Singer ( 1998 )
suggest three main core features of a life well lived: leading a life of purpose, quality connectionswith others, and positive self-regard and mastery. Ryan, Huta, and Deci ( 2008 ) propose that eudaimo-
nic living –a state of being true to one ’s self and maximising unique strengths –focuses individuals
on what is intrinsically worthwhile to human beings, which would lead to enhanced vitality and self-determination, re ﬂected through intrinsic motivation. These global, inner processes –eudaimonia,
subjective vitality, and intrinsic motivation –may also be involved in adolescents ’health-promoting
behavioural routines. For instance, adults with heightened vitality are more likely to apply theirenergy to behaviours and activities, such as physical activity, that are ‘good’ for them (Lewis, Kimiecik,
Horn, Zullig, & Ward, 2014 ). If one approaches life with self-expressive purpose (eudaimonic), he or
she has more self-directed energy (subjective vitality) to be physically active in ways that connectto healthy living. Also, studies have shown that more autonomous motives for eating healthyelicits more intrinsic need-satisfying experiences, producing more vitality and sustained healthy
eating (Verstuyf, Patrick, Vansteenkiste, & Teixeira, 2012 ).
Although at some point these global, intrinsic processes are considered to be a more permanent
part of one ’s personality, ADS suggests that youth and adolescents have potential for positive and
adaptive self-development via the concept of plasticity (Lerner, Fisher, & Weinberg, 2000 ). In addition,
Nota, Soresi, Ferrari, and Wehmeyer ( 2011 ) suggest that self-determination ‘plays a critical role in the
process of individuation and in the successful transition from adolescence to adulthood ’(p. 246). In
essence, adolescents who develop a strong sense of autonomy, competence, and relatedness should
have a more integrated perception of the self, supportive of one ’s inherent tendencies toward
psychological growth and development (Ryan & Deci, 2008 ; Soenens & Vansteenkiste, 2011 ; Stan-
dage, Gillison, Ntoumanis, & Treasure, 2012 ). From a PBDO perspective, adolescents who experience
this way of living would be motivated to move their bodies as a way to connect with or enhance thisintrinsic inner force. As an example, ﬁndings from a study on adolescent boys and girls demonstrated
that those high in positive well-being, encompassing global levels of autonomy, competence, relat-edness, and vitality, were more physically active and ate more green salad and vegetables whiledrinking less sugar-sweetened beverages than those low in well-being (Kimiecik & Horn, 2017 ). At
the situational level of analysis, Dishman, McIver, Dowda, Saunders, and Pate ( 2015 ) found auton-
omous motivation for physical activity more strongly related to movement behaviours in middleschool students than controlled motivation.
We are speci ﬁcally proposing that positive inner processes (such as eudaimonia, vitality, and intrin-
sic motivation) at the global or dispositional level of human experience have a signi ﬁcant e ﬀect on
adolescent health-promoting behaviours such as physical activity and healthy eating. We certainly do
not claim that eudaimonia, vitality, and intrinsic motivation are the only aspects of this health-enhan-
cing inner core, but they are a good starting point to further explore the impact of positive well-beingon adolescent physical activity and healthy eating. For example, Teixeira, Patrick, and Mata ( 2011 )
point out that sustaining health behaviour change over the long-term requires a psychological
energy tha
t can be felt at a deep personal level in congruence with all parts of the self. Due to
deeper and clearer self-meaning, it may be that positive well-being is an essential inner force for
directing and sustaining behaviour change (Kimiecik & Teas, 2019 ).
Implications
The goal of this paper has been to provoke thought about how we go about studying and interven-
ing in the lives of adolescents pertaining to healthy living. Speci ﬁcally, from a metatheoryHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 495
perspective, we have presented two approaches –risk-reduction/prevention and person-based/
development. Risk-reduction/prevention is grounded in a biomedical model and the PBDO approach
ﬁts under the PP, ADS, PYD umbrella. With an eye on paradigm, we analysed the health-behaviour
change approaches to intervention work with adolescents, and noted that paradigm shifts aremessy but necessary, leading to potential integration or separation of ideas and approaches to under-standing and solving the problem (i.e., adolescent physical activity). Emerging from this analysis are
implications for future work, or, at the very least, some things to consider when studying and enhan-
cing adolescent well-being and their health-promoting behaviour.
Key questions should be asked: What is the status of risk-reduction/prevention-oriented interven-
tions focused on changing adolescent physical activity? Can a more holistic development-orientedapproach be integrated with a prevention-oriented approach? It could be that creative integrationof both deterrence and development approaches into adolescent physical-activity interventions
will enhance their e ﬀectiveness. Some of this kind of work has been conducted by including
PBDO-type variables as mediators of change within physical activity interventions. For instance,
enjoyment has been found to be both a mediator and moderator of adolescent physical activity
within school-based physical activity interventions (Dishman et al., 2005 ; Schneider & Cooper,
2011 ). Although physical activity enjoyment –typically deﬁ ned as a positive a ﬀective response
encompassing generalised feelings of pleasure, liking, and fun –can have many sources (i.e., personal
mastery, perceptions of competence, positive social interaction), one broad source is intrinsic factors,
such as autonomy (Teixeira et al., 2011 ). Results from cross-sectional and prospective studies with
adolescents, emerging adults, and adults show that autonomous motivation is linked to health beha-
viours (Ng et al., 2012 ). For instance, Amorose, Anderson-Butcher, Newman, Fraina, and Iachini ( 2016 )
found in a sample of high school athletes that a relatively high level of self-determined motivation for
sport and physical activity was associated with autonomy support from at least two of coaches,
fathers, and mothers.
Few adolescent physical activity interventions have integrated PBDO-type constructs (e.g.,
eudaimonia) into their design, but some have blende d traditional health education classes (preven-
tion) with autonomy-supportive en vironments (development). For example, the LEAP intervention
utilised choice-based physical education and activ ities that adolescent girls may enjoy and demon-
strated an eight percent increase in vigorous phy sical activity compared to control schools (Pate
et al., 2005). Another study examined the impact of a sp ort-based PYD summer camp intervention
on physical activity among socially vulnerable y outh. Results demonstrated that the independent
eﬀects and interaction between sta ﬀand parent autonomy support signi ﬁcantly predicted both
physical activity self-e ﬃcacy and health and ﬁtness intentions (Anderson-Butcher et al., in press ).
Relatedly, Kulinna ’s(2013; Kulinna, Brusseau, Cothran, & Tudor-Locke, 2012 )s c h o o l - b a s e di n t e r v e n -
tion studies found that only in those s chools where the personnel designed their own programmes
did students’ physical activity within and outside the school increase. Supporting these ﬁndings,
results of an intervention with college students demonstrated that more young people were phys-
ically active in a programme that supported the ir need for autonomy (Chatzisarantis, Hagger,
Kamarova, & Kawabata, 2012 ).
These types of interventions grounded in autonomy, intrinsic motivation, and enjoyment could
be the next generation of physical activity inter ven
 tions for adolescents. We suggest that this is
where the adoption of a PBDO approach can serve as a catalyst to push the boundaries of design-
ing and testing adolescent-focused interventio ns relating to physical activity and other health
behaviours. Certainly, the integration of developme nt within prevention-oriented physical activity
interventions, as outlined above, has been a usef ul next step. But working from a PBDO framework
(see Table 1 to review guiding principles) frees up the ﬁeld to create and test other intervention
possibilities. For instance, how useful is a global (distal) approach for enhancing physical activity
as compared to a more contextual (proximal) intervention approach? Most adolescent interven-
tions have been proximal: the primary focus is on trying to change a speci ﬁcbehaviour , utilising
a comprehensive physical activity-based progra mme, and measuring intervening variables that496 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
assess motivation for that behaviour (e.g., self-regu lation for physical activity). A distal intervention
approach would emphasise the person as the starting point via global inner processes (e.g., auton-
omy, eudaimonia, subjective vitality) and exami ne changes in those processes as they relate to
adopting and maintaining health-promoting be haviours. As suggested throughout this paper,
there is enough evidence to serve as a found a t i o nt oc o n t i n u et ot e s tt h e s eP B D O - b a s e d
approaches in a more systematic fashion.
Importantly, these PBDO interventions for enhancement of adolescents ’positive well-being can
not only target individuals directly (e.g., activities/classes for enhancing intrapersonal processes),
but also indirectly through environmental change and community-building approaches (Dzewal-
towski et al., 2009 ). Many factors in ﬂuence the development of both positive well-being and physical
activity behaviour. A review of adolescent physical activity interventions demonstrated that a com-
bination of multiple factors (e.g., policy, environment, social networks, intrapersonal) within an eco-
logical perspective was the most e ﬀective approach for promoting youth physical activity (Perry et al.,
2012 ). However, as Whitley, Massey, Camiré, Boutet, and Borbee ( 2019 ) discovered in their systematic
review of sport-based youth development interventions, there is much left to be desired in terms ofthe research used to examine and understand such factors.
Pure PBDO programmes linked to health-promoting behaviours for adolescents are rare. This is
not surprising considering the emphasis on the long-term e ﬀects of health-risk behaviours for
young people. But consider an intervention study (Schwartz, Kurtines, & Montgomery, 2005)t h a t
examined the e ﬀectiveness of a self-discovery identity exploration process for emerging adults.
Grounded in Freire ’s(1973) transformative pedagogy where facilitator and participants learn
together in a group collaborative pr o c e s s ,t h ee x p e r i e n c ew a ss p e c i ﬁcally designed to enhance
ﬂow, personal expressiveness, and self-actualisat ion. Although this study did not examine connec-
tions between the intervention experience and heal th behaviours, both quantitative and qualitat-
iveﬁndings show that the intervention was successful in a ﬀecting these self-discovery, identity-
exploration processes. Similarly, Ruini et al. ( 2009) were able to enhance psychological well-
being of high school students with a six-session, s chool-based intervention focused on positive
emotions, autonomy, and life purpose. And Fr eire, Lima, Teixeira, Araujo, and Machado ( 2018)
demonstrated positive e ﬀects with adolescents in a similar type of intervention. These kinds of
studies are beginning to show that adolescents, as well as adults (Boehm et al., 2012 ), can be
moved toward experiencing optimal psychological functioning and positive well-being. This is sig-
niﬁcant in and of itself. The next step in the process would be to conduct similar kinds of positive
well-being interventions and examine their impa ct on health-promoting behaviours, such as phys-
ical activity and diet. The various work cited and highlighted throughout this paper would hypoth-
esise that when the intervention context emphasises positive well-being, health-enhancingbehaviours will be positively impacted.
Lastly, PBDO approaches should be designed to provide opportunities for individual self-discov-
ery and self-expression in safe, positive, and fun environments. Similar to the facilitator ’sr o l ei n
experiential learning pedagogy used in sport for youth development (Newman, Alvarez, & Kim,
2017), the facilitators in PBDO interventions ai m to introduce opportunities where youth can
experience what it feels like to be themselves, to be expressive in a way that ﬁts them, and to
help and support their peers throughout the process (see Table 1 ).
When young people are
asked what they ﬁnd most enjoyable about positive well-being programmes, they cite those
that are ‘activity oriented ’, provide substantial opportunities for ‘peer interaction ’,‘choice ’and
‘structure ’,‘being outdoors’ , and utilising ‘high school or college students’ as facilitators (DuBois,
Lockerd, Reach, & Parra, 2003). These are good guidelines to keep in mind when developing and
testing positive well-being experiences for y outh and adolescents. As is evident, the idea of
helping adolescents ﬁnd and experience their own strengths and gifts is not easy. Larson ( 2006)
h a sm a d eu sa w a r eo ft h i s ‘intentionality paradox ’, which is the dilemma faced by adults in
trying to keep ownership for the activities in the hands of the youth at the same time trying to
keep the activities on track.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 497
Conclusions
As pointed out throughout this paper, the ﬁndings of prospective studies have gone beyond a correla-
tional relationship to show that positive well-being predicts frequency of physical activity for adoles-
cents at later points in time (e.g., Carvajal, 2012 ; Hoyt et al., 2012 ; McDade et al., 2011 ). This
longitudinally-based link is especially relevant as research indicates that youth who do exercise regu-
larly are less likely to smoke cigarettes or marijuana than their less-active peers (Terry-McElrath,
O’Malley, & Johnston, 2011 ). If it can be demonstrated that interventions conducted within the
PBDO approach do, in fact, provide young people with enhanced inner resources that lead to a
more physically active lifestyle, they may be even more likely to ﬂourish and thrive as they avoid ‘nega-
tive trajectories that might otherwise lead to impaired functioning ’(Schwartz et al., 2010 ,p .2 0 8 ) .
We are at the very beginning stage of an emerging paradigm for enriching the lives of youth and
adolescents. A PBDO approach could be part of what Breslow ( 2004 ) labelled the third revolution of
health, where the focus transcends disease, and people view and experience health as a resource for
everyday life. At the heart of this revolution is the implication that perhaps we slow down in our rush
to help adolescents change behaviours, such as physical activity and healthy eating, and shift to
exploring with them how they want to experience their day now –and in the future. Do they want
to swim across the lake? Do they want to learn to draw? Do they want to swish a ball through a
net? Do they want to invent an app or robot? Or do they just want a means to express what ’s
burning inside them? Helping adolescents begin the journey to experience who they want to be
is the real health revolution. As they engage in this self-expressive process more youth could
create deeper meaning and vitality in their day and discover for themselves that physical activity
may feed and nourish the life they want to live. When that happens, it should be easier for themto start and keep moving for a lifetime.
Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank the editors and three anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and care
throughout the entire manuscript review process.
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
References
Amorose, A., Anderson-Butcher, D., Newman, T., Fraina, M., & Iachini, A. ( 2016 ). High school athletes ’self-determined
motivation: The independent and interactive e ﬀects of coach, father, and mother autonomy support. Psychology of
Sport and Exercise ,26,1 –8.
Anderson-Butcher, D., Amorose, A., Bates, S., Newman, T., Okamoto, K., & Volek, A. ( in press ). Exploring the in ﬂuence of
program sta ﬀand parental support on changes in physical health outcomes of vulnerable youth participating in a
sport-based positive youth development summer camp. Journal of Sport Behavior .
Anderssen, N., Wold, B., & Torsheim, T. ( 2005 ). Tracking of physical activity in adolescence. Research Quarterly for Exercise
and Sport ,76, 119 –129.
Antonovsky, A. ( 1996 ). The salutogenic model as a theory to guide health promotion. Health Promotion International ,11
(1), 725 –733.
Bargh, J. ( 2014 , January). Our unconscious mind. Scienti ﬁc American,3 2 –39.
Bavarian, N., Lewis, K., Acock, A., DuBois, D., Yan, Z., Vuchinich, S., …Flay, B. ( 2016 ). Eﬀ ects of a school-based social-
emotional and character development program on health behaviors: A matched-pair, cluster-randomized controlledtrial. The Journal of Primary Prevention ,37,8 7 –105.
Biddle, S., O’ Connell, S., & Braithwaite, R. ( 2011 ). Sedentary behaviour interventions in young people: A meta-analysis.
British Journal of Sports Medicine ,45, 937 –942.
Biddle, S. J., Petrolini, I., & Pearson, N. ( 2014 ). Interventions designed to reduce sedentary behaviours in young people: A
review of reviews. British Journal of Sports Medicine ,48(3), 182 –186.498 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
Boehm, J., Vie, L., & Kubzansky, L. ( 2012 ). The promise of well-being interventions for improving health risk behaviors.
Current Cardiovascular Risk Reports ,6, 511 –519.
Bouchard, C., Blair, S., & Haskell, W. ( 2012 ). Why study physical activity and health? In C. Bouchard, S. Blair, & W. Haskell
(Eds.), Physical activity and health (pp. 3– 20). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, Inc.
Breslow, L. ( 2004 ). Perspectives: The third revolution in health. Annual Review of Public Health ,25, xiii –xviii.
Brodersen, N., Steptoe, A., Boniface, D., & Wardle, J. ( 2007 ). Trends in physical activity and sedentary behaviour in ado-
lescence: Ethnic and socioeconomic di ﬀerences. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 41, 140 –144.
Bronfenbrenner, U. ( 1995 ). Developmental ecology through space and time: A future perspective. In P. Moen, G. H. Elder
Jr., & K. Lüscher (Eds.), Examining lives in context: Perspectives on the ecology of human development (pp. 619 –647).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Buchanan, D. ( 2000 ).An ethic for health promotion: Rethinking the sources of human well-being . New York: Oxford
University Press.
Buckley, J., Cohen, J., Kramer, A., McAuley, E., & Mullen, S. ( 2014 ). Cognitive control in the self-regulation of physical
activity and sedentary behavior. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience ,8,1–15.
Burt, M. ( 2002 ). Reasons to invest in adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health ,31, 136 –152.
Caldwell, L., Patrick, M., Smith, E., Palen, L., & Wegner, L. ( 2010 ). Inﬂuencing adolescent leisure motivation: Intervention
eﬀects of health wise South Africa. Journal of Leisure Research ,42, 203 –220.
Caldwell, L., Smith, E., Wegner, L., Vergnani, T., Mpofu, E., Flisher, A. J., & Mathews, C. ( 2004 ). Health wise South Africa:
Development of a life skills curriculum for young adults. World Leisure Journal ,46(3), 4– 17.
Capra, F. ( 1982 ).The turning point: Science, society and the rising culture . New York: Bantam Books.
Carvajal, S. ( 2012 ). Global positive expectancies in adolescence and health-related behaviours: Longitudinal models of
latent growth and cross-lagged e ﬀects. Psychology and Health ,27, 916 –937.
Catalano, R., Hawkins, D., Berglund, L., Pollard, J., & Arthur, M. ( 2002 ). Prevention science and positive youth development:
Competitive or cooperative frameworks? Journal of Adolescent Health ,31, 230 –239.
Chatzisarantis, N., Hagger, M., Kamarova, S., & Kawabata, M. ( 2012 ). When e ﬀects of the universal psychological need for
autonomy on health behaviour extend to a large proportion of individuals: A ﬁeld experiment. British Journal of Health
Psychology ,17, 785 –797.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. ( 1982 ). Toward a psychology of optimal experience. In L. Wheeler (Ed.), Review of personality and
social psychology (pp. 13– 36). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Damon, W. ( 2004 ). What is positive youth development? The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social
Science ,591,1 3 –24.
Deci, E., & Ryan, R. ( 2000 ). The “what ”and“why”of goal pursuits: Human needs and the self-determination of behavior.
Psychological Inquiry ,11, 227 –268.
Dishman, R., McIver, K., Dowda, M., Saunders, R., & Pate, R. ( 2015 ). Motivation and behavioral regulation of physical activity
in middle school students. Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise ,47, 1913 –1921.
Dishman, R., Motl, R., Saunders, R., Felton, G., Ward, S., Dowda, M., & Pate, R. ( 2005 ). Enjoyment mediates e ﬀects of a
school-based physical-activity intervention. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise ,37, 478 –487.
DuBois, D., Lockerd, E., Reach, K., & Parra, G. ( 2003 ). Eﬀ ective strategies for esteem-enhancement: What do young ado-
lescents have to say? The Journal of Early Adolescence ,23, 405 –434.
Duke, J., Huhman, M., & Heitzler, C. ( 2003 ). Physical activity levels among children aged 9-13 years —United States, 2002.
MMWR ,52, 785 –788.
Dumith, S., Gigante, D., Domingues, M., & Kohl, H. ( 2011 ). Physical activity change during adolescence: A systematic
review and a pooled analysis. International Journal of Epidemiology ,40, 685 –698.
Dzewaltowski, D., Estabrooks, P., Welk, G., Hill, J., Milliken, G., Karteroliotis, K., & Johnston, J. ( 2009 ). Healthy youth places: A
randomized controlled trial to determine the e ﬀectiveness of facilitating adult and youth leaders to promote physical
activity and fruit and vegetable consumption in middle schools. Health Education and Behavior ,36, 583 –600.
Ekkekakis, P. ( 2009 ). Let them roam free? Physiological and psychological evidence for the potential of self-selected exer-
cise intensity in public health. Sports Medicine ,39(10), 857 –888.
Ekkekakis, P. ( 2017 ). People have feelings! Exercise psychology in paradigmatic transition. Current Opinion in Psychology ,
16,8 4 –88.
Ekkekakis, P., & Zenko, Z. ( 2016 ). Escape from cognitivism: Exercise as hedonic experience. In M. Raab, P. Wylleman, R.
Seiler, A.-M. Elbe, & A. Hatzigeorgiadis (Eds.), Sport and exercise psychology research: From theory to practice (pp.
389–414). San Diego, CA: Elsevier Academic Press.
Fakhouri, T., Hughes, J., Burt, V., Song, M., Fulton, J., & Ogden, C. ( 2014 ).Physical activity in U.S. youth aged 12-15 years,
2012. (NCHS Data Brief, no 141). Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.
Flay, B. R. ( 2002 ). Positive youth development requires comprehensive health promotion programs. American Journal of
Health Behavior ,26(6), 407 –424.
Flay, B. R., & Allred, C. G. ( 2010 ). The Positive Action program: Improving academics, behavior and character by teaching
comprehensive skills for successful learning and living. In T. Lovat, R. Tommey, & N. Clement (Eds.), International
research handbook on values education and student wellbeing (pp. 471 –501). Dordrecht: Springer.
Freire, P. ( 1973 ).Education for critical consciousness . New York: Seabury Press.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 499
Freire, T., Lima, I., Teixeira, A., Araujo, M. R., & Machado, A. ( 2018 ). Challenge: To Be+. A group intervention program to
promote the positive development of adolescents. Children and Youth Services Review ,87, 173 –185.
Fryar, C. D., Carroll, M. D., & Ogden, C. L. ( 2014 ). Prevalence of overweight and obesity among children and adolescents:
United States, 1963 –1965 through 2011 –2012. Health E-Stats .
Ghane, A., & Sweeny, K. ( 2013 ). Embodied health: A guiding perspective for research in health psychology. Health
Psychology Review ,7(Suppl. 1), S159 –S184.
Haerens, L., De Bourdeaudhuij, I., Maes, L., Cardon, G., & Deforche, B. ( 2007 ). School-based randomized controlled trial of a
physical activity intervention among adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health ,40, 258 –265.
Hagger, M., & Chatzisarantis, N. ( 2014 ). An integrated behavior change model for physical activity. Exercise and Sport
Sciences Reviews ,42,6 2–69.
Hagger, M., Wood, C., Sti ﬀ, C., & Chatzisarantis, N. ( 2009 ). The strength model of self-regulation failure and health-related
behaviour. Health Psychology Review ,3, 208 –238.
Hales, C. M., Carroll, M. D., Fryar, C. D., & Ogden, C. L. ( 2017 ). Prevalence of obesity among adults and youth: United States,
2015 –2016. NCHS Data Brief ,288,1 –8.
Hankonen, N., Kinnunen, M., Absetz, P., & Jallinoja, P. ( 2014 ). Why do people high in self control eat more healthily? Social
cognitions as mediators. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 47, 242 –248.
Hayes, G., Dowd, K., MacDonncha, C., & Donnelly, A. ( 2019 ). Tracking of physical activity and sedentary behavior from
adolescence to young adulthood: A systematic literature review. Journal of Adolescent Health ,65(4), 446 –454.
Heintzelman, S., & King, L. ( 2013 ). On knowing more than we can tell: Intuitive processes and the experience of meaning.
The Journal of Positive Psychology ,8, 471 –482.
Hoyt,
L. T., Chase-Lansdale, P. L., McDade, T. W., & Adam, E. K. ( 2012 ). Positive youth, healthy adults: Does positive well-
being in adolescence predict better perceived health and fewer risky health behaviors in young adulthood? Journal of
Adolescent Health ,50(1), 66– 73.
Institute of Medicine (IOM). ( 2009 ).Local government actions to prevent childhood obesity . Washington, DC: The National
Academies Press.
Jackson, C., Geddes, R., Haw, S., & Frank, J. ( 2011 ). A systematic review of interventions to prevent or reduce substance use
and sexual risk behaviour in young people. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health ,65, 733 –747.
Jago, R., Baranowski, T., Yoo, S., Cullen, K. W., Zakeri, I., Watson, K., …Matheson, D. M. ( 2004 ). Relationship between phys-
ical activity and diet among African-American girls. Obesity Research ,12(S), 55S– 63S.
Janssen, I., Katzmarzyk, P. T., Boyce, W. F., Vereecken, C., Mulvihill, C., Roberts, C., …Pickett, W. ( 2005 ). Comparison of over-
weight and obesity prevalence in school-aged youth from 34 countries and their relationships with physical activity
and dietary patterns. Obesity Reviews ,6, 123 –132.
Karlsson, N., Lowenstein, G., & McCa ﬀerty, J. ( 2004 ). The economics of meaning. Nordic Journal of Political Economy ,30,
61–75.
Katzmarzyk, P. ( 2010 ). Physical activity, sedentary behavior, and health: Paradigm paralysis or paradigm shift? Diabetes ,
59, 2717 –2725.
Kimiecik, J. ( 2010 ). Reﬂecting on a well-being enhancement experience with ninth graders in a public school: The why,
what, and how of a screaming heart. Education in a Democracy: A Journal of the NNER ,2,9 5 –124.
Kimiecik, J. ( 2011 ). Exploring the promise of eudaimonic well-being within the practice of health promotion: The “how”is
as important as the “what ”.Journal of Happiness Studies ,12, 769 –792.
Kimiecik, J. ( 2016 ). The eudaimonics of health: Exploring the promise of positive well-being for healthier living. In J.
Vitterso (Ed.), Handbook of eudaimonic well-being (pp. 349 –370). Cham, Switzerland: Springer.
Kimiecik, J., & Horn, T. ( 2017 ). The big motivational picture: Examining the relationship between positive intrapersonal
processes and adolescent health-promoting behaviors. Applied Developmental Science ,21(1), 42– 57.
Kimiecik, J. C., & Lawson, H. A. ( 1996 ). Toward new approaches for exercise behavior change and health promotion. Quest ,
48, 102 –125.
Kimiecik, J., & Teas, E. ( 2019 ).Express yourself: Exploring the nature of the expressive self and its suppression by a market
society . Manuscript submitted for publication.
King, A., Stokols, D., Talen, E., Brassington, G., & Killingsworth, R. ( 2002 ). Theoretical approaches to the promotion of phys-
ical activity: Forging a transdisciplinary paradigm. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,23,1 5 –25.
Knowles, A., Niven, A., & Fawkner, S. ( 2014 ).‘Once upon a time I used to be active ’. Adopting a narrative approach to
understanding physical activity behaviour in adolescent girls. Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health ,6,
62–76.
Krajeski, J. ( 2008 , September 19). This is water. The New Yorker . Retrieved from http://www.newyorker.com/books/page-
turner/this-is-water
Kriemler, S., Meyer, U., Martin, E., van Sluijs, E., Andersen, L. B., & Martin, B. W. ( 2011 ). Eﬀect of school-based interventions
on physical activity and ﬁtness in children and adolescents: A review of reviews and systematic update. British Journal
of Sports Medicine ,45, 923 –930.
Kuhn, T. ( 1970 ).The structure of scienti ﬁc revolutions . Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Kulinna, P. ( 2013 ). School-based physical activity and health behaviors among adolescents. Kinesiology Review ,2,5 5 –60.500 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
Kulinna, P., Brusseau, T., Cothran, D., & Tudor-Locke, C. ( 2012 ). Changing school physical activity: An examination of indi-
vidually school designed programs. Journal of Teaching in Physical Education ,31, 113 –130.
Kurtines, W. M., Ferrer-Wreder, L., Berman, S. L., Lorente, C. C., Silverman, W. K., & Montgomery, M. J. ( 2008 ). Promoting
positive youth development: New developments in developmental theory, methods, and research. Journal of
Adolescent Research, 23, 233 –244.
Larson, R. ( 2000 ). Toward a psychology of positive youth development. American Psychologist ,55, 170 –183.
Larson, R. ( 2006 ). Positive youth development, willful adolescents, and mentoring. Journal of Community Psychology, 34,
677–689.
Lerner, R. M., Fisher, C. B., & Weinberg, R. A. ( 2000 ). Applying developmental science in the 21st century: International
scholarship for our times. International Journal of Behavioral Development ,24(1), 24– 29.
Lerner, R., Lerner, J., Bowers, E., & Geldhof, G. ( 2015 ). Positive youth development and relational-developmental systems.
In W. Overton & P. Molenaar (Eds.), Handbook of child psychology and developmental science, Vol. 1: Theory and method
(7th ed., pp. 607 –651). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Lerner, J.V., Phelps, E., Forman, Y., & Bowers, E. ( 2009 ). Positive youth development. In R. Lerner & L. Steinberg (Eds.),
Handbook of adolescent psychology (3rd ed., pp. 524 –558). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Lewis, P., Kimiecik, J., Horn, T., Zullig, K., & Ward, R. ( 2014 ). Can becoming my self in ﬂuence my health?: Exploring the
eﬀects of a eudaimonic well-being enhancement process on psychological indicators of well-being and physical
activity. Applied Research in Quality of Life ,9, 643 –665.
Lewis, K. M., Vuchinich, S., Ji, P., DuBois, D. L., Acock, A., Bavarian, N., …Flay, B. R. ( 2016 ). Eﬀects of the Positive Action program
on indicators of positive youth development among urban youth. Applied Developmental Science ,20(1), 16 –28.
Lichtenstein, A. H., Appel, L. J., Brands, M., Carnethon, M., Daniels, S., Franch, H. A., …Wylie-Rosett, J. ( 2006 ). Diet and life-
style recommendations revision 2006: A scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart Association nutrition commit-
tee. Circulation ,114,8 2–96.
Love, R., Adams, J., & van Sluijs, E. M. ( 2019). Are school-based physical activity interventions e ﬀective and equitable? A meta-
analysis of cluster randomized controlled trials with accelerometer-assessed activity. Obesity Reviews ,20(6), 859 –870.
Marcus, B. H., Williams, D. M., Dubbert, P. M., Sallis, J. F., King, A. C., Yancey, A. K., …Claytor, R. P. ( 2006 ). Physical activity
intervention studies: What we know and what we need to know: A scienti ﬁc statement from the American Heart
Association Council on Nutrition, Physical Activity, and Metabolism (Subcommittee on Physical Activity); Council on
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young; and the Interdisciplinary Working Group on Quality of Care and Outcomes
Research. Circulation ,114, 2739 –2752.
McDade, T., Chyu, L., Duncan, G., Hoyt, L., Doane, L., & Adam, E. ( 2011 ). Adolescents expectations for the future predict
health behaviors in early adulthood. Social Science & Medicine ,73, 391 –398.
Metcalf, B., Henley, W., & Wilkin, T. ( 2012 ). Eﬀectiveness of intervention on physical activity of children: Systematic review
and meta-analysis of controlled trials with objectively measured outcomes (EarlyBird 54). BMJ,345, e5888.
Moore, L. V., Thompson, F. E., & Demissie, Z. ( 2017 ). Percentage of youth meeting federal fruit and vegetable intake rec-
ommendations, Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System, United States, 2013. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and
Dietetics ,117, 545 –553.
Mulye, T., Park, M., Nelson, C., Adams, S., Irwin, C., & Brindis, C. ( 2009 ). Trends in adolescent and young adult health in the
United States. Journal of Adolescent Health ,45,8 –24.
Nettleton, S. ( 2006 ).The sociology of health and illness (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Polity Press.
Newman, T. ( 2019 ).Exploring life skill development and transfer: Experiences of youth in a community sport-based positive
youth development program (Published doctoral dissertation). The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH.
Newman, T., Alvarez, A., & Kim, M. ( 2017 ). An experiential approach to sport for youth development. Journal of Experiential
Education ,40(3), 308 –322.
Ng, J., Ntoumanis, N., Thogersen-Ntoumani, C., Deci, E., Ryan, R., Duda, J., & Williams, G. ( 2012 ). Self-determination theory
applied to health contexts: A meta-analysis. Perspectives on Psychological Science ,7, 325 –340.
Nota, L., Soresi, S., Ferrari, L., & Wehmeyer, M. L. ( 2011 ). A multivariate analysis of the self-determination of adolescents.
Journal of Happiness Studies ,12(2), 245 –266.
Oﬃce of the Surgeon General. ( 2010 ).The surgeon general ’s vision for a healthy and ﬁt nation . Rockville, MD: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. Retrieved from http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/obesityvision/
obesityvision2010.pdf
Overton, W. F. ( 2015 ). Process and relational developmental systems. In W. F. Overton & P. C. M. Molenaar (Eds.), Handbook
of child psychology and developmental science, Vol. 1: Theory and method (7th ed., pp. 9 –62). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Panday, S. L. ( 2017 ). The growing problem of pediatric obesity. Nursing Made Incredibly Easy! ,15(6), 24– 30.
Park, M., Scott, J., Adams, S., Brindis, C., & Irwin, C. ( 2014 ). Adolescent and young adult health in the United States in the
past decade: Little improvement and young adults remain worse o ﬀthan adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health ,55,
3–16.
Pate, R. ( 2012 ). Historical perspectives on physical activity, ﬁtness, and health. In C. Bouchard, S. Blair, & W. Haskell (Eds.),
Physical activity and health (pp. 21– 37). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics.
Pate, R., Ward, D., Saunders, R., Felton, G., Dishman, R., & Dowda, M. ( 2005 ). Promotion of physical activity among high-
school girls: A randomized controlled trial. American Journal of Public Health ,95, 1582 –1587.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 501
Pearson, N., & Biddle, S. ( 2011 ). Sedentary behavior and dietary intake in children, adolescents, and adults: A systematic
review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,41, 178 –188.
Pelletier, L., Dion, S., Slovinec-D ’Angelo, M., & Reid, R. ( 2004 ). Why do you regulate what you eat? Relationships between
forms of regulation, eating behaviors, sustained dietary behavior change, and psychological adjustment. Motivation
and Emotion ,28, 245 –277.
Perry, C., Garside, H., Morones, S., & Hayman, L. ( 2012 ). Physical activity interventions for adolescents: An ecological per-
spective. The Journal of Primary Prevention ,33, 111 –135.
Reyna, V., & Farley, F. ( 2007 ). Is the teen brain too rational? Scienti ﬁc American ,17,6 0 –67.
Rhodes, R. E., Janssen, I., Bredin, S. S. D., Warburton, D. E. R., & Bauman, A. ( 2017 ). Physical activity: Health impact, preva-
lence, correlates and interventions. Psychology & Health ,32, 942 –975.
Ruini, C., Ottolini, F., Tomba, E., Belaise, C., Albieri, E., Visani, D., …Fava, G. ( 2009 ). School intervention for promoting
psychological well-being in adolescence. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry ,40, 522 –532.
Ryan, R., & Deci, E. ( 2008 ). Self-determination theory and the role of basic psychological needs in personality and the
organization of behavior. In O. John, R. Robbins, & L. Pervin (Eds.), Handbook of personality: Theory and research
(pp. 654 –678). New York: The Guilford Press.
Ryan, R., Huta, V., & Deci, E. ( 2008 ). Living well: A self-determination theory perspective on eudaimonia. Journal of
Happiness Studies ,9, 139 –170.
Ryﬀ, C., & Singer, B. ( 1998 ). The contours of positive human health. Psychological Inquiry ,9,1–28.
Ryﬀ, C., & Singer, B. ( 2008 ). Know thyself and become what you are: A eudaimonic approach to psychological well-being.
Journal of Happiness Studies ,9,1 3 –39.
Schneider, M., & Cooper, D. M. ( 2011 ). Enjoyment of exercise moderates the impact of a school-based physical activity
intervention. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,8, 64.
Schwartz, S., Kurtines, W., & Montgomery, M. ( 2005 ). A comparison of two approaches for facilitating identity exploration
processes in emerging adults: An exploratory study. Journal of Adolescent Research ,20, 309 –345.
Schwartz, S. J., Pantin, H., Coatsworth, J. D., & Szapocznik, J. ( 2007 ). Addressing the challenges and opportunities for
today ’s youth: Toward an integrative model and its implications for research and intervention. The Journal of
Primary Prevention ,28(2), 117 –144.
Schwartz, S. J., Phelps, E., Lerner, J. V., Huang, S., Brown, C. H., Lewin-Bizan, S., …Lerner, R. M. ( 2010 ). Promotion as pre-
vention: Positive youth development as protective against tobacco, alcohol, illicit drug, and sex initiation. Applied
Developmental Science ,14(4), 197 –211.
Schwartz, S., Waterman, A., Vazsonyi, A., Zamboanga, B., Whitbourne, S., Weisskirch, R., …Ham, L. ( 2011 ). The association
of well-being with health risk behaviors in college-attending young adults. Applied Developmental Science ,15,2 0 –36.
Segar, M., & Richardson, C. ( 2014 ). Prescribing pleasure and meaning: Cultivating walking motivation and maintenance.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,47, 838 –841.
Seligman, M., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. ( 2000 ). Positive psychology: An introduction. American Psychologist ,55,5 –14.
Smith, E., Palen, L., Caldwell, L., Flisher, A., Graham, J., Mathews, C., …Vergnani, T. ( 2008 ). Substance use and
sexual risk prevention in Cape Town, South Africa: An evaluation of the HealthWise program. Prevention Science ,9,
311–321.
Soenens, B., & Vansteenkiste, M. ( 2011 ). When is identity congruent with the self? A self-determination theory perspec-
tive. In S. J. Schwartz, K. Luyckx, & V. L. Vignoles (Eds.), Handbook of identity theory and research (pp. 381 –402).
New York: Springer.
Sonstroem, R. ( 1997 ). The physical self-system: A mediator of exercise and self-esteem. In K. Fox (Ed.), The physical self:
From motivation to well-being (pp. 3– 26). Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, Inc.
Standage, M., Gillison, F. B., Ntoumanis, N., & Treasure, D. C. ( 2012 ). Predicting students ’physical activity and health-
related well-being: A prospective cross-domain investigation of motivation across school physical education and exer-
cise settings. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology ,34(1), 37– 60.
Strong, K., Parks, S., Anderson, E., Winett, R., & Davy, B. ( 2008 ). Weight gain prevention; Identifying theory-based targets
for health behavior change in young adults. Journal of the American Dietetic Association ,108, 1708 –1715.
Sutherland, R., Campbell, E., Lubans, D., Morgan, P., Okely, A., Nathan, N., …Wiggers, J. ( 2016 ).‘Physical Activity 4
Everyone ’school-based intervention to prevent decline in adolescent physical activity levels: 12 month (mid-interven-
tion) report on a cluster randomized trial. British Journal of Sports Medicine ,50, 488 –495.
Teixeira, P., Patrick, H., & Mata, J. ( 2011 ). Why we eat what we eat: The role of autonomous motivation in behaviour regu-
lation. British Nutrition Foundation Nutrition Bulletin ,36, 102 –107.
Terry-McElrath, Y. M., O ’Malley, P. M., & Johnston, L. D. ( 2011 ). Exercise and substance use among American youth, 1991 –
2009. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,40(5), 530 –540.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. ( 2018 ).Physical activity guidelines for Americans (2nd ed.). Washington,
DC: Author.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and U.S. Department of Agriculture. ( 2015 , December). 2015 –2020 Dietary
Guidelines for Americans (8th ed.).
Vallerand, R., & Lalande, D. ( 2011 ). The MPIC model: The perspective of the hierarchical model of intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation. Psychological Inquiry ,22,4 5 –51.502 J. KIMIECIK ET AL.
van Sluijs, E. M., McMinn, A. M., & Gri ﬃn, S. J. ( 2008 ). Eﬀectiveness of interventions to promote physical activity in children
and adolescents: Systematic review of controlled trials. British Journal of Sports Medicine ,42, 653 –657.
Verstuyf, J., Patrick, H., Vansteenkiste, M., & Teixeira, P. ( 2012 ). Motivational dynamics of eating regulation: A self-deter-
mination theory perspective. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,9, 21.
Whitley, M., Massey, W., Camiré, M., Boutet, M., & Borbee, A. ( 2019 ). Sport-based youth development interventions in the
United States: A systematic review. BMC Public Health ,19(1), 89.
Williams, G. C., Cox, E. M., Hedberg, V., & Deci, E. L. ( 2000 ). Extrinsic life goals and health-risk behaviors in adolescents1.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,30, 1756 –1771.
Zimmerman, S., Phelps, E., & Lerner, R. ( 2008 ). Positive and negative developmental trajectories in U.S. adolescents: Where
the Positive Youth Development perspective meets the de ﬁcit model. Research in Human Development ,5, 153 –165.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 503
