Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
http://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Download by:  [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] Date:  09 February 2016, At: 06:50
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: 1743-7199 (Print) 1743-7202 (Online) Journal homepage: http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Theoretical explanations for maintenance
of behaviour change: a systematic review of
behaviour theories
Dominika Kwasnicka, Stephan U Dombrowski, Martin White & Falko
Sniehotta
To cite this article:  Dominika Kwasnicka, Stephan U Dombrowski, Martin White & Falko
Sniehotta (2016): Theoretical explanations for maintenance of behaviour change: a systematic
review of behaviour theories, Health Psychology Review, DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2016.1151372
To link to this article:  http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2016.1151372
Accepted author version posted online: 07
Feb 2016.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1
View related articles 
View Crossmark data

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
1 
 Publisher: Taylor & Francis 
Journal: Health Psychology Review 
DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2016.1151372 
 
Theoretical explanations for main tenance of behaviour change:  
a systematic review of behaviour theories. 
 
Dominika Kwasnicka1,2, Stephan U Dombrowski3, Martin White4 and Falko Sniehotta1,2 
 
1 Institute for Health and Society, Newcastle University 
2 UKCRC Centre for Excellence in Translational Public Health Research (fuse), Newcastle 
University  
3 School of Natural Sciences , University of Stirling  
4 UKCRC Centre for Diet and Activity Research (CEDAR), University of Cambridge 
 
 
Corresponding author FF Sniehotta, falko.sniehotta@ncl.ac.uk 
Abstract 
Background:  Behaviour change interventions are effective in supporting individuals in 
achieving temporary behaviour change. Behaviour change mainte nance, however, is rarely 
attained. The aim of this review was to identify and synthesise current theoretical 
explanations for behaviour change maintenance to inform future research and practice.  
Methods:  Potentially relevant theories were id entified through systematic searches of 
electronic databases (Ovid MEDLINE, Embase, Ps ycINFO). In addition, an existing database 
of 80 theories was searched, and 25 theory expe rts were consulted. Theo ries were included if 
they formulated hypotheses about behaviour ch ange maintenance. Included theories were 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
2 
 synthesised thematically to ascertain overa rching explanations for behaviour change 
maintenance. Initial theoretical themes were cross-validated.  
Findings:  One hundred and seventeen behaviour theo ries were identified of which 100 met 
the inclusion criteria. Five overarching, interconnected them es representing theoretical 
explanations for behaviour change maintena nce emerged. Theoretical explanations of 
behaviour change maintenance focus on the diffe rential nature and role of motives, self-
regulation, resources (psychological and physical ), habits, and environmental and social 
influences from initiation to maintenance. Discussion:  There are distinct patterns of theoretical explanations for behaviour change and 
for behaviour change maintenance. The findings from this review can guide the development 
and evaluation of interventions promoting mainte nance of health behaviours and help in the 
development of an integrated theory of behaviour change maintenance.  
 
Keywords : behaviour change; behaviour main tenance; theory; theory review
 
 
Introduction 
Importance of behaviour maintenance  
There is considerable evidence that behaviour can be effectively modified through behaviour 
change interventions (Albarracin et al., 2005; Hobbs et al., 2013). However, evidence for the 
sustainability of behaviour change  in response to interventions is limited (Avenell et al., 
2004; Carpenter et al., 2013; Dombrowski, Knittle, Avenell, Araújo-Soares, & Sniehotta, 2014; Fjeldsoe, Neuhaus, Winkler, & Eakin, 2011) . This is partly because few studies 
evaluate long-term effects and partly because intervention eff ects diminish over time (Curioni 
& Lourenco, 2005; Dombrowski, Avenell, & Sn iehotta, 2010). Relapse rates are high for 
individuals who join weight loss program mes (Tsai & Wadden, 200 5); initiate smoking 
cessation attempts (Carpenter  et al., 2013; Hughes, Keely, & Naud, 2004), try to reduce 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
3 
 alcohol consumption (Moos & Moos, 2006) or make attempts to stop sexual risk behaviours 
(Kelly, Stlawrence, & Brasfield, 1991). Theory of behaviour change ma intenance can provide 
guidance on the development and evaluation of interventions promoting sustained change in 
health behaviours. Current evidence about the e ffectiveness of theory-b ased interventions to 
change health-related behaviours is inconsistent (Gourlan et al ., 2015; Prestwich et al., 2014) 
which may, in part, be due to the lack of  theoretical elaboration on the process of 
maintenance after initial change.  
Conceptual background to the analysis of  behaviour change maintenance theories 
To facilitate the review and synthesis of a wide range of theories  with varied objectives, it is 
helpful first to briefly rehear se their conceptual background in the psychology of behaviour. 
In any given situation indivi duals have various behavioural  options. These behavioural 
options might be intentionally and/or impulsive ly driven and may be predicated by prior 
behaviour. Each of these options has a certain likelihood of being enacted at any given time, 
reflecting current individual (m otivation, habits, resources) and contextual (cues, opportunity 
costs and opportunities) factors. This likelihood  of enacting each behavioural response at a 
given time and in a given context has been term ed a ‘behavioural pote ntial’ by Rotter (1960). 
Similarly, Heckhausen and Beckmann (1990) con ceptualised the variab le feature of how 
strongly an intention is pred isposed for implementation in a given situation as ‘fiat 
tendencies’. Behavioural potentials vary over time and context as illustrated in a fictitional 
example in Figure 1. The individual is hypothesise d to enact the behavioural option with the 
highest potential in each situation and tim e (Heckhausen & Beckmann, 1990; Rotter, 1960).  
--------------- ---Figure 1 here---- ---------- -------- 
Before behaviour change, prior behaviour, such as unhealthy eatin g patterns, may be 
dominant responses across times and contex ts. After behaviour change, newly adopted 
behaviour may become the dominant respon se in many contexts. Area A in Figure 1 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
4 
 illustrates times when enacting the newly adopted behaviour is the dominant response, Area 
B shows times when the prior behaviour become s dominant again, indicating the risk of a 
potential lapse. The new behaviour is likely to be maintained over time if it becomes the dominant response across contexts. Thus, a th eoretical analysis of behaviour change 
maintenance will need to take into consideration various behavioural options and the probability of them being enacted over time and acr oss contexts.  It is currently unclear what 
conditions are required to maintain the new behavi our and prevent relapse, or to re-establish 
the new behaviour after relapse.   
Theory and behaviour change maintenance  
For the purpose of this review, theory was defined as a se t of statements that organises, 
predicts and explains observations. Theory expl ains how phenomena relate to each other, and 
what can be expected under unknown conditi ons (Bem & Looren de Jong, 1997). Theory 
may be useful for research to improve our unde rstanding of maintained behaviour as well as 
for the design and implementation of interventi ons to achieve behaviour change maintenance 
(Craig et al., 2008). To date th ere has been no comprehensive review or synthesis of theories 
to explain behaviour change main tenance. The aim of this revi ew was therefore to identify 
and synthesise theoretical explanations for be haviour change maintenance from behavioural 
theories and to examine the relationships between these explanations. Theories for 
maintenance of any human behaviour were examin ed; however, our particular interest was in 
the application of the findings to health beha viours. The main research question was what are 
the current theoretical explanations for behaviour change maintenance?  
Methods 
Design  
Systematic review of behaviour theories . Table 1 provides a summary of methods. 
--------------- ---Table 1 here---- ---------- -------- 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
5 
 Theory identification 
Theories were identified in three ways: 
1. Systematic database searches were performed to identify theories which met the inclusion criteria (see below). Ovid MEDLINE, Embase a nd PsycInfo databases were searched using a 
comprehensive search strategy (Appendix 1), a maintenance-relevant set of search terms 
included ‘maintenance’, ‘behaviour maintenance’, ‘maintain’, ‘sustain’, ‘sustained behaviour’, ‘sustained change’,  ‘habit’, and ‘maintenance stage’ as well as appropriate 
synonyms, and American spellings, adjusted in  accordance with the particular database. 
There was no time limit applied. The search was updated on 1
st March 2014.  
2. Eighty theories from a systematic review of  behaviour change theories across psychology, 
sociology, anthropology, and economics were re viewed for inclusion (Michie, Campbell, 
Brown, & West, 2014)1. 
3. Forty behaviour change theory experts were contacted and asked to identify any theories 
relevant to behaviour change ma intenance; experts were defined as theory authors or critics. 
For each theory, key articles were identified based on relevance and ci tations (Appendix 2).  
Inclusion and exclusion criteria   
Inclusion criteria:  Theories published in any language before 1st March 2014 related to 
behaviour change maintenance based on the fo llowing operational definitions ('Theory' and 
'Behaviour' definitions taken from Michie et al., 2014): 
Theory:  A set of concepts and/or statements with specification of how phenomena 
relate to each other. Theory provides an organising descripti on of a system that accounts for 
what is known, and explains and predicts phenomena. 
Behaviour:  Anything an individual does in response to internal or external events. 
Overt action (motor or verbal) which is directly measurable; behaviours are physical events 
                                                            
1 The list of theories was based on one received on 9th February 2012 by the Theory Project Team; (final list of 
theories published here: Michie, Campbell, Brown, & West, 2014).  
 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
6 
 that occur in the body and ar e controlled by the brain. 
Behaviour change maintenance : The continuous performance of a behaviour 
following an initial intentional change at a level that significantly differs from the baseline 
performance in the intended di rection. While some authors have suggested time cut-offs for 
behaviour change and transition to behaviour change ma intenance (Prochaska & Di 
Clemente, 1983; Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross, 1992), a time cut-off were not 
indicated here, as they may vary depending on behaviour, context and individual factors. 
Exclusion criteria:  (a) Theories about animal behaviour; (b ) theories exclus ively based on 
research with animals; and (c) unpublished theo ries presented in diss ertations and doctoral 
theses. Screening was conducted by two reviewers. All cases where inclusion/exclusion was 
unclear were discussed and agreed within the research team. 
Data Extraction 
Each theory was allocated a uni que ID (Appendix 3). The theory name and its full references 
were recorded. Initia lly, verbatim statements about be haviour change maintenance and 
explanations of behaviour change maintenanc e based on interpretations of the theoretical 
statements were extracted from each theory us ing a standardised data extraction form. In 
addition, intended theoretical applications including behaviour, context or population 
specificity were extracted if stated. Data was extracted by one reviewer and two other 
reviewers each independently extracted data from 10% of the included articles. Extraction 
forms were compared resulting in full  agreement between the reviewers.  
Data Synthesis 
Explanatory hypotheses for behaviour change ma intenance were initially extracted by one 
researcher. The data synthesis team met regul arly over 18 months to discuss each of the 
theories from the dataset and confirm the extr acted theory statements. The data synthesis 
team consisted of the authors with backgrounds  in psychology and publ ic health who have 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
7 
 experience in researching and applying behavioural theories, and in conducting systematic 
reviews and qualitative synthesis. For each th eory, statements about maintenance were 
extracted verbatim and transformed into simple, jargon-free explanatory hypotheses about 
maintenance. This allowed grouping similar explanatory hypotheses across theories. The 
outcome of the meetings was a list of summative explanatory hypotheses about behaviour change maintenance derived from all included theories. Thematic theoretical analysis of the explanatory hypot heses was employed to synthesise the 
data and identify patterns of th eoretical explanations (themes). The analysis followed a staged 
process including familiarisation with quotes and their interpretations, generating initial codes (specific themes and subthemes), assessing themes among codes (overlapping 
characteristics), reviewing themes, defining an d naming themes, and producing a final report. 
After theory themes were generated overlap s and relationships between themes were 
analysed. Their relationship and dependencies are described in the discussion. Thematic 
analysis was used to generate a concise se t of summative explanaroty constructs and 
propositions about their role in the mainte nance of behaviour change. These summative 
constructs represent broad themes based on commonalities between theoretical explanations in terms of constructs and assumed mechanis ms. The theoretical propositions within each 
theme were further organised by subthemes, illu strated by subheaders in the results section.  
The themes resulting from the data synthesis were cross-validated by ten health psychology 
researchers not familiar with the current revi ew. They evaluated the validity of themes by 
allocating each a randomly selected 10% of th e total extracted theoretical statements to 
themes (Appendix 4). Allocation of one statem ent to more than one theme was permitted. 
Inter-rater agreement on allocation of themes was calculated as Krippendorff’s α 
(Krippendorff, 2012).  
Results  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
8 
 A total of 264 records was iden tified through the search strate gy. After removal of duplicates, 
171 records were screened for eligibility. Full texts of 117 theories (Appendix 2) were 
examined, out of which 100 published theories me t the inclusion criteria (see Figure 2 for 
PRISMA diagram). To further validate the se arch, 40 international theory experts were 
contacted, out of them, 25 replie d suggesting theories with relevant hypot heses for behaviour 
change maintenance. The most commonly suggeste d theories were: transtheoretical model of 
change (suggested by n = 11) (Prochaska & Di  Clemente, 1983; Procha ska et al., 1992); the 
Health Action Process Approach (HAPA) (n = 10) (Schwarzer, 1992, 2008); social cognitive theory (n = 9) (Bandura, 1986) ; Marlatt’s relapse prevention theory (n = 9) (Marlatt & 
George, 1984; Witkiewitz & Ma rlatt, 2004); Rothman’s theory of maintenance (n = 8) 
(Rothman, 2000; Rothman, Baldwin, & Hert el, 2004; Rothman, Sheeran, & Wood, 2009); 
self-determination theory (n = 7) (Ryan & Deci, 2000) and habit theories (n = 6) (Verplanken 
& Aarts, 1999; Verplanken & Orbell, 2003) (Gardner, 2014).  
Among the 100 included theories, 73 were beha viour specific (see A ppendix 3). Fifty-three 
out of the 73 behaviour specific theories explai ned health-related behaviours. Most of the 
health behaviour specific theories built upon other existing theories and applied these to 
behaviour specific contexts. Twenty-six  theories were behaviour specific and population 
specific; all population specific theo ries included in this review we re also behaviour specific.  
How do current theories explain behaviour change maintenance?  
Many behavioural theories do not explicitly address the issue of behavioural maintenance. 
Fourty-three included theories involved assumptions of dynamic reciprocity, meaning 
assumptions that explanatory variables are modi fied through exposure to the target behaviour. 
For example, social cognition models, such as the theory of planned behavior (Ajzen, 1991) 
hypothesise that behaviour is a function of cognitions about the desirability and 
controllability of behaviour. Repeated perfor mance may lead to a re-evaluation of the 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
9 
 behaviour and individual may rea lise that it is less de sirable or controllable than they thought 
when they adopted the behaviour. While many theo ries suggest that maintained behaviour is 
explained within the same theo retical constructs as behaviour  initiation, the content (e.g., 
self-efficacy), direction and value of the constr ucts may change substantially from initiation 
to maintenance.  
For the remaining theories where differential explanatory hypotheses for initiation and maintenance could be derived, theory-guided them atic analysis resulted in five overarching 
interrelated themes (Table 2). These themes were cross-validated by 10 psychologists, whose 
independent assessments resulted in a high level of agreement (Krippendorff’s α = 0.87).  
The five themes reflect specific theoretical explan ations about how i ndividuals maintain 
initial behaviour changes over time and in diffe rent contexts. Themes focus on the changing 
roles of motives, self-regulation, habits, resources and contextual factors from initial behaviour change to successful maintenance.  Explanatory hypothesis for behaviour change 
maintenance are described for each theme, followed by specific examples taken from 
individual theories. Figure 3 provides an overview of the proposed inter-relationships 
between the five theoretical themes. 
-------------- Table 2 here ----------------- 
-------------- Figure 3 here ---------------- 
Theme 1: Maintenance motives  
Motives are the drivers for volitional behavi our. They help establishing priorities and 
allocating resources. Initial beha viour change is often motivated  by expectations of uncertain 
long-term outcomes (e.g. changing one’s diet to reduce health risks). It has been hypothesised 
that maintenance motives are often different from  those motives that prompted individuals to 
make initial changes. Motives are hypothesised to  be particularly facilitating for maintenance 
if they enable regular gratif ication from enacting the new be haviour, rather than from the 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
10 
 experience of changing, for example by focussi ng on behaviour enjoyment, satisfaction with 
behavioural outcomes, self-determination, or if individuals experien ce congruence of the 
newly adopted behaviour with thei r identity, beliefs and values.  
Enjoyment of behaviour and satisfaction with outcomes  
Behaviour is more likely to be  sustained if the reinforcemen t structure emphasises immediate 
and affective outcomes rather than rational and l ong-term outcomes. Motivation to avoid 
negative health consequences is hypothesised to be insufficient to maintain preventive 
behaviour that requires maintained effort, ther efore positive maintenance motives are needed 
(precaution adoption process model - We instein, 1988; Weinstein & Sandman, 1992). 
Individuals engage more strongly in what they ar e doing if they ‘feel ri ght about it’ and if it 
fits with their decisions and prior engagement (regulatory fi t theory - Higgins, 2006). This 
may include the enjoyment of performing the behaviour as such, or the enjoyment of 
immediate outcomes of the behaviour (temporal  self-regulation theory  - Hall & Fong, 2007; 
model of behaviour maintenance - Rothman, 2000; Rothman et al., 2004; Groningen active 
living model - Stevens, Bult, de Greef, Lemmink, & Rispens, 1999). After initial adoption of 
new behaviours individuals are th eorised to evaluate the results of their efforts cogntitively 
and emotionally. If the actual results reflect the desired results, the initial motivation is 
reinforced, individuals are likely to make positiv e self-judgements and to sustain their efforts 
(behavioral model of medicati on adherence - De Bruin, Host ers, Van Den Borne, Kok, & 
Prins, 2005). The nature and timing of anticipated and experienced outcomes impacts on behaviour change maintenance.  
Self-determination  
Immediate changes in behavi our are often motivated by ex trinsic motivation (i.e. an 
individual thinking that they ought to comply with external demands). However, intrinsic 
motivation (i.e. the individual wanting to ma intain the new behaviour) is hypothesised to 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
11 
 have a stronger influence on behaviour maintenance than extrin sic motivation (self-
determination theory - Deci & Ryan, 2000; Ryan  & Deci, 2000). Similarly, behaviour change 
is more likely to be maintained if a new behaviour resembles an individual’s values and is 
perceived as personally relevant. Initially ex trinsically-motivated behaviour may develop 
intrinsic features over time and repeated performance.  
Identity  
Individuals are thought to be mo re likely to maintain behaviours which are in line with the 
beliefs they have about themselves (self-con cept theory - Bracken, 1996;  self-schema theory - 
Markus, 1977)). Self-identity and nested beliefs a nd values can change as a result of engaging 
with a behaviour. For instance, an individual who exercises re gularly can develop the self-
representation of being a sportsperson or a person who no longer smokes can develop the 
identity of a non-smoker. Such  changes in identi ty positively enhance behaviour change 
maintenance. These beliefs guide behaviour cha nge maintenance as they lead and organise 
the processing of self-relevant information and standards, and create ongoing positive experiences associated w ith the new behaviour.   
Initial behaviour change that is triggered by a si gnificant life event or crisis can cause a shift 
in an individual’s identity (p rocess of reinvention theory  - Epiphaniou & Ogden, 2010; 
Ogden & Hills, 2008). Such event-triggered ch anges are hypothesised to be particularly 
sustainable. A life event or crisis usually relate s to relationships, health, or other changes in 
circumstances judged to be highly significant. Be haviour change as a result of a life event is 
often maintained if the individu al no longer perceives themselves to benefit from the prior 
behaviour, if there are fewer opportunities to pe rform the prior behaviour or if they believe 
that the prior behaviour was the cause of the crisis. Individuals experience shifts in their beliefs, followed by identity changes which support behaviour change maintenance (Epiphaniou & Ogden, 2010).  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
12 
 Congruence with identity is theori sed as a key feature of behavi our internalisation processes, 
behavioural regulation and behaviour change ma intenance (health behavior internalization 
model - Bellg, 2003). Internalisation is described as  the learning of values or attitudes. Self-
needs (i.e. identity, self-determination, security  and support) and behavi our-related needs (i.e. 
preference, context competence and coping) inte ract and influence internalisation and self-
regulation of the new health related behaviou r leading to behaviour change maintenance. 
Individuals are biased to self -regulate their behaviour in line with their self-concept. 
Theme 2. Self-regulation  
Self-regulation refers to any effort to activ ely control behaviour by inhibiting dominant and 
automatic behaviours, urges, emotions or desires and replace those with goal-directed 
responses (Baumeister, Heathe rton, & Tice, 1994). Theoretical  explanations for behaviour 
change maintenance utilising self-regulation fo cus on the need for active behaviour control, 
on self-regulation skill, and th e process of self-regulation a nd coping with barriers. Their 
relative contributions are dependent on pers onal resources, the strength of habits and 
environmental influences (Figure 3).    
Self-regulation need  
The need for active self-regulation changes over time and the course of the behaviour change 
process. Figure 1 illustrates how the behaviour al potential (dominance of response) of the 
new behaviour and conflicting responses may va ry over time as a result of individual and 
contextual factors. Individuals often initiate behaviour change when the moment is right, e.g. 
at times when opportunity costs and goal conf licts are low and motivation and capacity high. 
Context-specific cues, options and opportunity co sts as well as varying levels of  motivation 
may increase the risk of momentary lapses (Heckhausen & Beckmann, 1990; Rotter, 1960). 
In particular, self-regulation is thought to be needed when  new behaviours are not fully 
automatic and the behavioural pot ential of prior behaviours is st ill high (model of behaviour 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
13 
 maintenance - Rothman, 2000; Rothman et al., 2004). Temporal change s in motivation to 
maintain behaviour change are directly rela ted to self-regulation need; when motivation 
decreases, the need for active self-regulation increas es. Some theorists hypothesise that the 
need for self regulation decreases as individua ls repeatedly enage in the new behaviour as 
they unlearn previous habits and develop new ones (habit theory - Verplanken & Aarts, 1999) 
and build self-efficacy to maintain behavi our (HAPA - Schwarzer, 1992, 2008). Inversely, 
some theoretical accounts suggest that the need  for self-regulation may increase over time as 
repeated effort and self-restriction result in ego-depletion (strength model of self-control - 
Baumeister, 2002; Baumeister, 2003; Baumei ster & Heatherton, 1996) and decrease in 
motivation over time.  
Self-regulation skill  
Individuals differ in their skill to regulate th eir behaviour, known as ‘self-regulatory capacity’ 
(temporal self-regulation theory  - Hall & Fong, 2007). Over time,  costs and resources vary 
and the skill to successfully self-regulate behaviour is more important when self-regulatory 
tasks are more challenging. These stable di fferences in self-regulatory capacity are 
hypothesised to reflect executive control functi ons (e.g., planning skill, inhibition control, 
task switching) and they explain the ability  to override automated responses (Nederkoorn, 
Houben, Hofmann, Roefs, & Jansen, 2010). Thos e with lower self-regulatory capacity are 
hypothesised to show weaker intention-behaviour relationships (Hall, Fong, Epp, & Elias, 2008). With time and repetition, individuals may deve lop better skills to actively self-regulate 
their behaviour (model of self-cont rol - Muraven & Baumeister, 2000). 
Self-regulation processes 
Self-regulation includes the ongoing processes of  self-monitoring, self-e valuation and self-
reinforcement (Kanfer & Karoly, 1972) as well as dealing with tempta tions, hedonistic and 
impulsive influences that are in conflict with  long-term goals. Behaviour change maintenance 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
14 
 is theorised as an outcome of active and on -going self-regulation. The process of self-
regulation is based on a system of hierarchica lly organised goals. Individuals monitor their 
behaviour against their goals and adjust their efforts if they pe rceive discrepancy between the 
current and a desired state (control theory - Carver & Scheier, 1982). If no discrepancy is 
detected or if behaviour exceeds standards, th e individual will feel satisfied (self-regulation 
theory - Kanfer & Gaelick-Buys , 1991). Behaviour that falls s hort of relevant goals causes 
dissatisfaction and leads the individual to spend more efforts or disengage from the goal.  
Lapse, relapse and coping with behavioural barriers  
Self-regulation involves coping wi th behavioural barri ers, overcoming temptations, managing 
lapses and avoiding relapses. A la pse is a singular event in whic h an individual deviates from 
their desired goal (e.g. a cigarette smoked during an abstinence attempt). It may occur when 
the behavioural potential is high for the prio r behaviour and when motivation to adhere to 
new health behaviour is low. A relapse is a se quence of lapses strung to gether, a setback, that 
causes reversion to the prior behaviour (e.g. regular smoking) (Witkiewitz & Marlatt, 2004). 
Relapse prevention theory includes variables that directly influence behaviour change maintenance, but not necessarily behaviour init iation, including interpers onal stress, cravings, 
mood, and self-efficacy of managing lapses (H endershot, Witkiewitz, George, & Marlatt, 
2011).  In response to situations with a high risk of lapse or  relapse, individuals  may apply effective 
coping responses and as a result their sel f-efficacy and positive outcome expectancies 
increase and the probability of future relapse d ecreases (relapse prevention theory - Marlatt & 
George, 1984). Nevertheless, individuals may fail to apply effective coping responses in high risk situations and as a result their self-e fficacy and positive outcome expectancies decrease; 
then individuals often return to their prior beha viour and their probability of future relapses 
increases (Marlatt & George, 1984).  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
15 
 In order to maintain a behaviour, an individu al needs to develop high coping self-efficacy to 
overcome barriers  (HAPA - Schwarzer, 1992, 2008). An individual with a high level of 
coping self-efficacy responds confidently to be havioural barriers with effective behaviour 
change maintenance strategies (i.e. action planning and coping planning), with sustained 
effort and prolonged persistence. Recovery self-efficacy, on the other hand, addresses the 
experience of failure followed by the recovery  from a setback (HAPA - Schwarzer, 2008). 
Coping planning involves prospect ively linking coping strategies  to anticipated barriers to 
behaviour change (Sniehotta, Schwarzer, Scholz, & Schuz, 2005) . Action planning is 
considered to be more important during beha viour initiation, whereas  coping planning is 
hypothesised to facilitate behaviour change maintenance (Sniehotta et al., 2005).  
Theme 3. Habits   
Habits are actions that have become automati cally triggered by situational cues (Lally, Van 
Jaarsveld, Potts, & Wardle, 2010; Verplanken, 2 006). Habit development follows a period of 
successful self-regulation of a new behaviour . Consciously controll ed behaviours become 
automatic over time with repetition and are theo rised to be performed outside of conscious 
awareness (Hofmann, Friese, & Wiers, 2008; Hunt & Martin, 1988; Rothman et al., 2009; 
Verplanken & Aarts, 1999). De veloping new favourable, habitu al cue responses can help 
maintain new behaviours, however the stronger pr ior habits are, the mo re likely an individual 
is to lapse to the prior beha viour . Removing cues that may trigger unhealthy behaviour from 
the environment supports behaviour change main tenance by means of the stimulus control 
(transtheoretical model of change - Prochask a & Di Clemente, 1983; Pr ochaska et al., 1992).  
Dual process models and habit theories   
In dual process models  behaviour is theorised to be governed by the in terplay of two 
regulatory systems, a reflective system, which is based on conscious deliberation, controlled 
but effortful, which aims to override a quicker automatic system that responds in line with 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
16 
 habits and impulses (dual-system models - Stra ck & Deutsch, 2004). Individuals can maintain 
behaviour through ongoing self-r egulation, however, self-regulation draws on finite 
psychological resources which can be depleted . When resources are low self-regulation is 
likely to fail. Thus, the most sustainable mechanism for maintenance is to develop 
automaticity for the newly adopted behaviour.  Behaviour is a function of reflective and automatic processes (health-related model of behaviour change - Hunt & Martin, 1988; 2x2 be haviour change matrix - Rothman et al., 
2009; theory of interpersonal behaviour - Triandis, 1977). Higher levels of cognitive processing are usually not necessary when activ ities become habitual. Habitual behaviours 
are carried out with minimum awareness wh ile conscious behaviours are performed only 
occasionally. Relegation of habits to lower levels of consciousness is seen as part of the human adaptation process. Individu als are able to deal with a large number of internal and 
external stimuli because habitual behaviours require minimum levels of awareness and 
resources. Higher level self-regulation, decisi on making and monitoring processes can then 
deal with more novel features of the enviro nment. Habit facilita tes behaviour change 
maintenance as desired activities become habitual, taking place outside of conscious 
awareness (habit theory - Verplanken & Aarts, 1999). Reflective and automatic influences are 
altered by boundary conditions (i.e. habitualness, ego depletion (impulsive versus reflective 
framework - Hofmann et al., 2008). 
Learning theories and habit  
Learning theories provide explanations for the influence of the environment on behaviour and 
for the development of habits. Repetition and reinforcement are considered as a key to habit 
formation (and associative theories of goal-di rected behaviour - de Wit & Dickinson, 2009; 
Pavlovian instrumental transfer - Hall, Parkinson, Connor, Dickinson, & Everitt, 2001; 
classical conditioning - Pavlov, 1927 and operant conditioning - Skinner, 1953; two-factor 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
17 
 avoidance theory - Stasiewicz & Maisto, 1993). Behaviour change  maintenance is promoted 
by a number of factors such as situating new lear ning in the most releva nt contexts, providing 
retrieval cues after the new learning is complete, and varying the contexts in which the new 
learning takes place (A learning theory perspect ive on the maintenance of behaviour change - 
Bouton, 2000).  Learning theories  provide a wide range of explanations for how new 
behaviours are acquired and become habitual. In order to maintain behaviour it is hypothesised that it is beneficial for individuals to be 
conditioned to certain behavioural  responses occurring in a given situational context.  For 
new conditioned reflexes to be established any external stimulus (which will become the signal in a conditioned reflex) must overlap in time with the action of an unconditioned 
stimulus (classical conditioning - Pavlov, 1927). Afte r repeated association of a stimulus with 
a behavioural response, maintenance of behavi our develops. Individuals can be conditioned 
to perform new behaviours if a stimulus and its behavioural response become associated; to 
break an existing associati on, stimuli and response must be  disassociated (classical 
conditioning - Pavlov, 1927; operant conditioni ng - Skinner, 1953). For instance when 
individuals adopt a new, healthy diet, they are conditioned to certain stimuli, (e.g. lunch time) 
which produces a situational response (e.g. consuming a salad). Repeated association of stimuli and response leads to behaviour change maintenance. Unleaning or dissociation is a 
slow process and in some cases does not occu r for behaviours which are engrained and thus 
still remain response options even after many years of not practicing them.    
Theme 4.  Resources 
Resources are psychological and physical assets that can be drawn on during the process of 
behavioural regulation. As maintaining beha viour change is often difficult and requires 
sustained efforts, resources available to the in dividual are hypothesised to play an important 
role. When resources are limited or depleted  due to stress, tiredness, exhaustion and 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
18 
 intoxication, an individual’s self -regulatory capacity is limited.  
Individuals are more likely to initiate behaviour change at ti mes when their psychological and 
physical resources are plentiful and when opportun ity costs (effort needed to enact behaviour) 
are low (i.e. resources are not immediately needed for competing demands). Over time 
opportunity costs and resources vary and habitual  behaviours are likely to dominate  when 
resources are limited (see Figure 1, situation B). The processes of breaking old habits and 
developing new ones are likely to act in conj unction for behaviour change maintenance. 
Lapse and relapse are thus, theorised to be a ssociated with low leve ls of resources.   
Dual process models offer a perspective on understanding how resources impact on 
behaviour change maintenance. It is hypothesised that behaviour  can be governed by either a 
resource-intensive reflective or a mostly automataed impulsive system and that resources act 
as moderators (boundary conditions) determining which of the system generates the response (dual-system models (impulsi ve versus reflective framework - Hofmann et al., 2008; dual-
system models - Strack & Deutsch, 2004). Ev en when cognitive resources are limited 
effective maintenance can occur if the behaviour is habitu ally instigated.  
Self-regulation as a limited resource  
It is suggested that self-regul ation draws on finite mental re sources which become depleted 
through the use of self-regulatory processes and take time and to rest and recover (strength 
model of self-control - Baumeister, 2003; Ha gger, Wood, Stiff, & Chatzisarantis, 2009; 
Muraven & Baumeister, 2000). Coping with stre ss, resisting temptations, and controlling 
emotions requires additional se lf-regulatory efforts and each additional attempt to self-
regulate is more likely to fail. When cognitive resources ar e limited, individuals who are 
actively self-regulating to engage  in a new behaviour are prone to engage in impulsive or 
automatic actions which reflect the prior be haviour (strength mode l of self-control - 
Baumeister, 2002; Baumeister, 2003; Baumeister & Heatherton, 1996). Fo r instance, dieters 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
19 
 are vulnerable to uncont rolled eating when cognitive processe s are disrupted (dietary restraint 
theory - Polivy & Herman, 1985). Self-regulation or willpower draw upon a mental resource 
and require energy which can be depleted; indi viduals who actively self-regulate are less 
effective at subsequent tasks that also requ ire self-control (Hagger et al., 2013). Rest and 
positive affect help restore the resources (Baumeister, 2003).  
Inter-individual differences in resources and resources availability  
There are inter-individual differences in the availability of cognitive resources required to 
override automatic responses (dual-system models - Strack & Deutsch, 2004). When 
recources are in short supply, th e automatic system overrides th e reflective one, often leading 
to maintenance failure. Dispositional or situ ational moderators shif t the weight between 
impulsive and reflective influences (impulsive versus reflective fram ework - Hofmann et al., 
2008).  Restrained cognitive resources paired wi th unconscious positive expectations towards 
unhealthy behaviour may hinder behaviour change maintenance. Conditions that have been 
hypothesised to also hinder behaviour change maintenance, include ego depletion (Collins & 
Lapp, 1992), high cognitive load (Friese, Hofm ann, & Wanke, 2008), low working memory 
capacity (Fletcher, Marks, & Hine, 2011), and influence of alcohol and other substances 
(Gunn, Finn, Endres, Gerst, & Spinola, 2013).  
Throughout the lifespan, social and individual resources change and individuals develop, 
elaborate and commit to individual goals (model of selection, optimisation and compensation - Baltes, 1997). Goal selection can be electiv e or in response to experienced change in 
resources. During elective goal selection individual s define their goals in order to match their 
individual needs and motives. Loss-based goal selection is a response to the loss of 
previously available resources. Optimisation re fers to acquiring, applying and refining goal-
directed means. Individuals adjust their goals to  focus or redirect their efforts to maintain 
functioning or they substitute for a functional loss via compensation.  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
20 
 Theme 5. Environment and social influences  
The final theme includes features of the social and environmental context of action which 
provide available options, sets incentives and disincentives, oppor tunity costs a nd cues with 
contingency for behavioural responses. This them e includes aspects of the choice architecture 
that alter the opportunity costs and accessibility  of behaviour options (Thaler & Sunstein, 
2008). Many theories emphasise the role of a suppor tive external environment on behaviour 
change maintenance, and most ecological models of behaviour suggest equal explanations for behaviour initiation and ma intenance (Bronfenbrenner, 1977, 1986; McLeroy, Bibeau, 
Steckler, & Glanz, 1988; Panter-Brick, Clarke , Lomas, Pinder, & Li ndsay, 2006). However, 
some theories such as habit theories (Hofmann et al., 2008; Hunt & Martin, 1988; Rothman et al., 2009; Verplanken & Aarts, 1999), hypothesise that environmental cues related to prior and newly adopted behaviours explain whether or not a newly adopted behaviour is 
maintained. A supportive environment, positive social influences and constructive social 
change facilitate maintenance of behaviour cha nge as it lowers the op portunity costs of the 
new behaviour. Environmental factors determin e the amount of active self-regulation and 
recource required by the individu al and behaviour change is le ss likely to be maintained in 
environments which are not conducive of the ne wly adopted behaviour (Mackenbach et al., 
2014). 
Environment   
As active self-regulation is effortful, the defau lt mode is to respond to  the behavioural option 
most facilitated by the environmental choice ar chitecture (Figure 1). Individuals may develop 
context-dependent associations which are easy to maintain in the same environment (process 
model for supporting lifestyle behaviour change - Greaves, Reddy, & Sheppard, 2010; 
impulsive versus reflective fram ework - Hofmann et al., 2008; 2 x 2 behaviour change matrix 
- Rothman et al., 2009; habit theory - Verplank en & Aarts, 1999). It is  theorised that if 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
21 
 individuals change their context, they are more  likely to perform no n-habitual behaviour  
(habit theory - Verplanken, Walker, Davis,  & Jurasek, 2008). Wh en the environment 
changes, a window of opportunity opens for habit change (habit theory - Verplanken et al., 
2008) and individuals may be more  likely to maintain habitual behaviours in stable contexts. 
Environmental changes can presen t a threat for habitual beha viours but also opportunity for 
new behaviours.  
Social influence 
Like environmental factors, social influen ce affects the opportunity costs and incentive 
structure for behavioural options in  a given context. It can affect  the effort needed to perform 
new behaviours. Provided support can increase individual capacity to maintain behaviour 
(e.g. by providing encouragement or help). So cial influence occurs when an individual’s 
opinions, emotional states and behaviours are affected by others. Knowledge and skills are 
acquired through the social modelling; the obs ervation and replication of other peoples’ 
actions  (social cognitive theory - Bandura, 1986). Individuals are more likely to follow the guidanc e given to them by people they trust and they 
feel connected to (Bandura, 1986). Thus, to ma intain a new behaviour a sense of relatedness 
must be developed (self-determination theo ry - Deci & Ryan, 2000; Ryan & Deci, 2000). 
Group membership define indivi duals; individuals are motivat ed to evaluate their group 
positively, usually showing a preference for a gr oup they belong to as compared to other 
groups (social identity theory - Turner, 1987). I ndividuals attempt to ac hieve or to maintain 
positive social identity (social identity model - Tajfel & Turner, 1979). They sustain actions which are in line with group norms and which are approved by group members (e.g. 
substance abuse theory - Ne ff & MacMaster, 2005). Thus, i ndividuals tend to follow the 
social norms and rules of the group they belong to.  
Social change – how norms are shaped, accepted and maintained  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
22 
 Social change can facilitate behaviour change maintenance. Large-scale behavioural change 
is often achieved by changing th e standards of what is accep table in a given community 
(social change theory - Thomps on & Kinne, 1990). Social change is described as a three step 
process: unfreezing, moving, and freezing  (theory of change - Lewin, 1951) or 
implementation, embedding and su staining (normalisation pro cess theory - May & Finch, 
2009; May et al., 2009). The process of freezing is simialr to maintaining newly introduced 
behaviours, which have become social norms and which are accepted in the given context 
(theory of change - Lewin, 1951). ‘Social habits ’ are socially accepted behaviours that are 
resistant to change; ‘a quasi-stationary equilibri um state’ is stable and susceptible to change 
state which at the same time is underpinned by an on-going social process (theory of change - 
Lewin, 1951). Sustaining embedded practices in their social contexts, also called ‘integration’, is relevant to maintaining behaviours (normalisation process theory - May & 
Finch, 2009; May et al., 2009), through social change practices can become routinely 
embedded in everyday life. For social change to be maintained, individuals should feel 
responsible for the programmes promoting change and they should take control over them so 
they continue to maintain them after initia l organising efforts (social change theory - 
Thompson & Kinne, 1990).  
Discussion 
Main findings 
By systematically reviewing maintenance-re levant behaviour change theories, five 
overarching interconnected theoretical themes emerged: maintenance motives, self-
regulation, resources, habits, and contextual influences. Based on these themes, differential 
hypotheses for the initiation and maintenance of health-related behaviours have been 
formulated. In Figure 3 a graphica l illustration of the review findings is presented, integrating 
these theoretical themes, and summarising current theoretical concepts relevant for behaviour 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
23 
 change maintenance.  
Individuals need at least one sustained motivator to maintain  behaviour; these may include 
behaviour enjoyment, satisfaction with behavi oural outcomes, self-determination, or an 
experience of behavioural cong ruence with beliefs and values, all of which often develop 
after initiating a new behaviour. It is likely that individuals start behaviour change attempts at 
times when their motivation is at the highest  and opportunity costs are low (Figure 1). As 
motivation and opportunity costs regress to the mean (i.e., as motivation decreases and costs 
increase), the need for self-regulatory effort is increased in order to ensure that the new behaviour continues despite le ss than optimal conditions.  
The ongoing and active use of limited cognitive se lf-regulatory resource s can result in ego 
depletion, with stress, tiredness, substance use, and nega tive affect also le ading to a decreased 
ability to exert control over, or  self-regulate, behaviour. At di fferent times and depending on 
the availability of cognitive resources, motiv ation, and level of depletion, behaviour change 
maintenance may alternate between needing to  be actively self-regulated and being 
automatic, context-driven and effortless. With repeated performance of a new behaviour, the 
need for conscious self-regulati on decreases and behaviour becomes habitual, which in turn 
increases the chance that it will be maintained.  Behaviour, whether under conscious  control or occurring automatically and habitually, occurs 
within an environmental and social  context, with such influences serving to either facilitate or 
hinder behaviour change maintenance. As with  the initiation of behaviour change, stable 
contexts make behaviour and habits easier to sustain. Thus, ecological factors are important 
for both behaviour initiation and maintenance. 
Comparison with other studies 
This systematic theory review adds to existing knowledge by providing a comprehensive 
review of theories to identif y theoretical hypothes es about maintained behaviour change. 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
24 
 While previous reviews have focused on behaviour change (Cane, O'Connor, & Michie, 
2012; Michie et al., 2005), this is the firs t review to specifica lly assess theoretical 
explanations for behaviour change maintenance. Overall, this review provides a summary of 
theoretical explanations  for behaviour change maintenan ce; however, further research is 
needed to test the proposed relationships within and between the emerging themes.  
Strengths and limitations  
The main strength of this review is the comp rehensive and rigorous search and the thematic 
theoretical synthesis of availabl e theories addressing behaviour change maintenance. In this 
study, a new approach to theory analysis was pr esented, including identification of theoretical 
explanations and theory synthesis specifically in relation to behaviour change maintenance. 
This review not only identified themes that rela te to behaviour change maintenance, but also 
resulted in the formulation of a number of  theoretical predictions including the inter-
relationships and dependencies between themes.  
While the resulting summary provides a deta iled description of broad themes and 
relationships relevant to main tenance, for a more detailed account of specific predictions, 
individual theories may be more relevant. In the validation exercise, experts were asked to 
assign theoretical statements to the themes emerging from the synthesis in this review. It 
cannot be ruled out, that a different set of th emes would have represented the data equally 
well or better.  This theory review drew mainly on theories which were designed and/or assessed in the 
context of health-related behavi ours, and while the findings may be applicable to other 
contexts and behaviours, the de gree of generalisability require s testing. While some theories 
have been tested (Hagger et al., 2009; McEachan, Conn er, Taylor, & Lawton, 2011; 
Kwasnicka, Presseau, White, & Sniehotta, 2013)  many theories lack systematic empirical 
evaluations. Similarly, the theoretical themes that  emerged in this review will require further 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
25 
 evaluation, development and testing as part of a systematic interative process of theory 
building (Head & Noar, 2014; Noar & Head, 2 014; Rhodes, 2014;  Sniehotta, Presseau, & 
Araujo-Soares, 2015). 
Unanswered questions and future research 
The main contribution of this review is the identification of the main hypotheses for 
behaviour change maintenance formulated in the theoretical literature to date. It provides a 
platform for future research and practice in behaviour change maintenance, which is a key 
priority area in behaviour change science. Fu ture research should systematically review the 
existing evidence for each theoretical theme; a nd undertake further empi rical testing of each 
explanation, followed by empirical  testing of an integrated theo retical model. Evidence from 
theory-based interventions should be used to revise, refine, or reject theoretical principles 
(Rothman, 2004). Dialogue between theory and pract ice is encourag ed so that theories are not 
only used to design interventi ons, but interventions also inform the redevelopment of 
theories. Predictions and theoretic al explanations should be tested  across a variety of settings 
and populations, facilitating theory developm ent. Future research should focus on the 
informed development of behaviour change main tenance theory, test themes presented within 
this review, explore relationshi ps between themes and constructs, and add new theoretical 
predictions.    
Implications for health behaviour change maintenance and conclusions  
The theoretical explanations described within the five overarching them es can be applied in 
health contexts to help explain maintenance of  health-related behaviour s. Listed theoretical 
assumptions may be applied to facilitate in terventions targeting health promotion and 
maintenance of health behaviours. They can serve as guidance for intervention developers 
who can target five maintenance processes: 
1. Helping individuals to maintain positiv e behaviour change maintenance motives, 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
26 
 emphasizing positive outcomes of a new health  behaviour, providing behavioural options 
which are enjoyable, inspiring individuals to redefine themselves in line with new healthy 
lifestyle principles. 2. Facilitating behaviour self-re gulation; for instance through self-monitoring behaviour and 
helping individuals to develop effective strategies to overcom e behavioural barriers and to 
prevent relapse.  3. Facilitating habit development and maintenance for positive health behaviour changes; for instance by reshaping the environment and making healthy options salient and by cuing 
individuals towards h ealthy behaviours.  
4. Providing individuals with reso urces that are needed to succe ssfully maintain a new health 
behaviour. Resources can be physical (e.g., sport facilities, health products) or psychological 
(e.g., self-regulation training, mindf ulness and relaxation methods). 
5. Reshaping the environment at individual, so cial and community levels. Providing social 
support and introducing social changes that are in line with positive health behaviour change 
maintenance. Specific theoretical explanations of behaviour change maintenance have been presented in 
this review. This review examined and summarised 100 theories that explicitly or implicitly explain how individuals mainta in new behaviours. Five th eoretical themes included 
maintained motivation, active se lf-regulation, habitual cue driven responses and boundary 
conditions including resources and environmental factors. This review can act as a starting 
point on the journey towards an integrated  behaviour change maintenance theory.  
 
Conflict of interest statement : The authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.  
 
  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
27 
 References  
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes, 50(2), 179-211. doi:10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-t 
Albarracin, D., Gillette, J. C., Earl, A. N., Glasman,  L. R., Durantini, M. R., & Ho, M. H. (2005). A 
test of major assumptions about behavior change: A comprehensive look at the effects of 
passive and active HIV-prevention interventi ons since the beginning of the epidemic. 
Psychological Bulletin, 131(6), 856-897. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.131.6.856 
Avenell, A., Broom, J., Brown, T. J., Poobalan, A., Aucott, L., Stearns, S. C., . . . Grant, A. M. (2004). 
Systematic review of the long-term effects and economic consequences of treatments for obesity and implications for health improvement.  
Baltes, P. B. (1997). On the incomplete architectur e of human ontogeny - Selection, optimization, and 
compensation as foundation of developmental theory. American Psychologist, 52 (4), 366-380. 
doi:10.1037//0003-066x.52.4.366 
Bandura, A. (1986). Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive Theory. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Baumeister, R. F. (2002). Yielding to Temptation: Self ‐Control Failure, Impulsive Purchasing, and 
Consumer Behavior. Journal of Consumer Research, 28 (4), 670-676.  
Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Ego depletion and self-re gulation failure: A resource model of self-control. 
Alcoholism-Clinical and Experimental Research, 27 (2), 281-284. 
doi:10.1097/01.alc.0000060879.61384.a4 
Baumeister, R. F., & Heatherton, T. F. (1996). Self-regulation failure: An overview. Psychological 
Inquiry, 7 (1), 1-15. doi:10.1207/s15327965pli0701_1 
Baumeister, R. F., Heatherton, T. F., & Tice, D. M. (1994). Losing control: How and why people fail 
at self-regulation.  San Diego: Academic Press. 
Bellg, A. J. (2003). Maintenance of health behavior  change in preventive cardiology - Internalization 
and self-regulation of new behaviors. Behavior Modification, 27 (1), 103-131. 
doi:10.1177/0145445502238696 
Bem, S., & Looren de Jong, H. (1997). Theoretical Issues in Psychology  (1st ed.). London: SAGE 
Publications Ltd   
Bouton, M. E. (2000). A learning theory perspec tive on lapse, relapse, and the maintenance of 
behavior change. Health Psychology, 19 (1), 57-63. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.19.Suppl1.57 
Bracken, B. A. (1996). Handbook of self-concept: Developmental, social, and clinical considerations : 
John Wiley & Sons. 
Bronfenbrenner, U. (1977). Toward an expe rimental ecology of human development. American 
Psychologist, 32 , 513-531.  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
28 
 Bronfenbrenner, U. (1986). Ecology of the Family  as a Context for Human Development: Research 
Perspectives. Developmental Psychology, 22 (6), 723-742.  
Cane, J., O'Connor, D., & Michie, S. (2012). Validati on of the theoretical domains framework for use 
in behaviour change and implementation research. Implementation Science, 7 . 
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-7-37 
Carpenter, M. J., Jardin, B. F., Burris, J. L., Mathew, A. R., Schnoll, R. A., Rigotti, N. A., & 
Cummings, K. M. (2013). Clinical strategies to  enhance the efficacy of nicotine replacement 
therapy for smoking cessation: a review of the literature. Drugs, 73 (5), 407-426.  
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1982). Cont rol theory: A useful conceptual framework for 
personality-social, clinical , and health psychology. Psychological Bulletin, 92 , 111-135.  
Collins, R. L., & Lapp, W. M. (1992). The temptati on and restraint inventory for measuring drinking 
restraint. British Journal of Addiction, 87 (4), 625-633.  Retrieved from <Go to 
ISI>://WOS:A1992HP53200012 
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew, M. (2008). Developing and 
evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical Research Council guidance. British 
Medical Journal, 337 (7676). doi:10.1136/bmj.a1655 
Curioni, C. C., & Lourenco, P. M. (2005). Long-term weight loss after diet and exercise: a systematic 
review. International Journal of Obesity, 29 (10), 1168-1174.  
De Bruin, M., Hosters, H. J., Van Den Borne, H. W., Kok, G., & Prins, J. M. (2005). Theory- and 
Evidence-Based Intervention to Improve Adhe rence to Antiretroviral Therapy Among HIV-
Infected Patients in The Netherlands: A Pilot Study. AIDS PATIENT CARE and STDs, 19 (6), 
384-394.  
de Wit, S., & Dickinson, A. (2009). Associa tive theories of goal-directed behaviour: a case for 
animal-human translational models. Psychological Research-Psychologische Forschung, 
73(4), 463-476. doi:10.1007/s00426-009-0230-6 
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). The “what” and the “why” of goal pursuits: Human needs and the 
self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry, 11 , 227-268.  
Dombrowski, S. U., Avenell, A., & Sniehotta, F.  F. (2010). Behavioural Interventions for Obese 
Adults with Additional Risk Factors for Morbidity: Systematic Review of Effects on 
Behaviour, Weight and Disease Risk Factors. Obesity Facts, 3 (6), 377-396. 
doi:10.1159/000323076 
Dombrowski, S. U., Knittle, K., Avenell, A., Araújo-S oares, V., & Sniehotta, F. F. (2014). Long term 
maintenance of weight loss with non-surgical in terventions in obese adults: systematic review 
and meta-analyses of randomised controlled trials. BMJ: British Medical Journal, 348 .  
Epiphaniou, E., & Ogden, J. (2010). Successful We ight Loss Maintenance and a Shift in Identity 
From Restriction to a New Liberated Self. Journal of Health Psychology, 15 (6), 887-896. 
doi:10.1177/1359105309358115 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
29 
 Fjeldsoe, B., Neuhaus, M., Winkler, E., & Eakin, E.  (2011). Systematic review of maintenance of 
behavior change following physical activity and dietary interventions. Health Psychology, 
30(1), 99.  
Fletcher, J. M., Marks, A. D. G., & Hine, D. W. (2011). Working memory capacity and cognitive 
styles in decision-making. Personality and Individual Differences, 50 (7), 1136-1141. 
doi:10.1016/j.paid.2011.02.002 
Friese, M., Hofmann, W., & Wanke, M. (2008). Wh en impulses take over: Moderated predictive 
validity of explicit and implic it attitude measures in predicti ng food choice and consumption 
behaviour. British Journal of Social Psychology, 47 , 397-419. 
doi:10.1348/014466607x241540 
Gardner, B. (2014). A review and analysis of th e use of ‘habit’in understanding, predicting and 
influencing health-related behaviour. Health Psychology Review (ahead-of-print), 1-19.  
Gourlan, M., Bernard, P., Bortolon, C., Romain, A., Lareyre, O., Carayol, M., . . . Boiché, J. (2015). 
Efficacy of theory-based interventions to promote physical activity. A meta-analysis of 
randomised controlled trials.  
Greaves, C., Reddy, P., & Sheppard, K. (2010) . Supporting Behaviour Change for Diabetes 
Prevention. In P. Schwarz, P. Reddy, C. Greaves, J. Dunbar, & S. J. (Eds.), Diabetes 
prevention in practice (pp. 19-29). Dresden: Tumaini Institute for Prevention Management. 
Gunn, R. L., Finn, P. R., Endres, M. J., Gerst, K. R., & Spinola, S. (2013). Dimensions of disinhibited 
personality and their relation with alcohol use and problems. Addictive Behaviors, 38 (7), 
2352-2360.  Retrieved from <Go to ISI>://CCC:000319245000013 
Hagger, M. S., Leaver, E., Esser, K., Leung, C.-M., Pas, N., Keatley, D., . . . Chatzisarantis, N. D. 
(2013). Cue-Induced Smoking Urges Deplete Cigarette Smokers’ Self-Control Resources. Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 1-7. doi:10.1007/s12160-013-9520-8 
Hagger, M. S., Wood, C., Stiff, C., & Chatzisarantis , N. L. D. (2009). The strength model of self-
regulation failure and h ealth-related behaviour. Health Psychology Review, 3 (2), 208-238.  
Hall, J., Parkinson, J. A., Connor, T. M., Dickinson,  A., & Everitt, B. J. (2001). Involvement of the 
central nucleus of the amygdala and nucle us accumbens core in mediating Pavlovian 
in¯uences on instrumental behaviour. European Journal of Neuroscience, 13 , 1984-1992.  
Hall, P. A., & Fong, G. T. (2007). Temporal sel f-regulation theory: A model for individual health 
behavior. Health Psychology Review, 1 (1), 6-52.  
Hall, P. A., Fong, G. T., Epp, L. J., & Elias, L. J. (2008). Executive function moderates the intention-
behavior link for physical activity and dietary behavior. Psychology & Health, 23 (3), 309-
326. doi:10.1080/14768320701212099 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
30 
 Head, K. J., & Noar, S. M. (2014). Facilitating progress in health behaviour theory development and 
modification: The reasoned action approach as a case study. Health Psychology Review, 8 (1), 
34-52.  
Heckhausen, H., & Beckmann, J. (1990) . Intentional action and action slips. Psychological Review, 
97(1), 36.  
Hendershot, C. S., Witkiewitz, K., George, W. H., & Marlatt, G. A. (2011). Relapse prevention for 
addictive behaviors. Substance Abuse Treatment Prevention and Policy, 6 . doi:10.1186/1747-
597x-6-17 
Higgins, E. T. (2006). Value from regulatory fit. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 14 (4), 
209-213 
Hobbs, N., Godfrey, A., Lara, J., Errington, L., Meyer, T., Rochester, L., . . . Sniehotta, F. (2013). Are 
behavioral interventions effective in increasing ph ysical activity at 12 to 36 months in adults 
aged 55 to 70 years? a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Medicine, 11 (1), 75.  
Retrieved from http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/11/75 
Hofmann, W., Friese, M., & Wiers, R. W. (2008). Impulsive versus reflective influences on health 
behavior: a theoretical framework and empirical review. Health Psychology Review, 2 (2), 
111-137  
Hughes, J. R., Keely, J., & Naud, S. (2004). Shap e of the relapse curve a nd long-term abstinence 
among untreated smokers. Addiction, 99 (1), 29-38. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2004.00540.x 
Hunt, S. M., & Martin, C. J. (1988). Health-relate d behavioural change–A test of a new model. . 
Psychology and Health, 2 , 209-230.  
Kanfer, F. H., & Gaelick-Buys. (1991). Self-managem ent methods. In F. H. Kanfer & A. P. Goldstein 
(Eds.), Helping people change: A textbook of methods  (pp. 305-360). New York: Pergamon 
Press. 
Kanfer, F. H., & Karoly, P. (1972). Self-control: A behavioristic excursion into the lion's den. 
Behavior Therapy, 3 (3), 398-416. doi:10.1016/S0005-7894(72)80140-0 
Kelly, J. A., Stlawrence, J. S., & Brasfield, T. L. (1991). Predictors of vulnerability to AIDS risk 
behavior relapse. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 59 (1), 163-166. 
doi:10.1037/0022-006x.59.1.163 
Krippendorff, K. (2012). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology : Sage. 
Kwasnicka, D., Presseau, J., White, M., & Sniehotta, F.  F. (2013). Does planning how to cope with 
anticipated barriers facilitate health-relate d behaviour change? A systematic review. Health 
Psychology Review, 7 (2), 129-145.  
Lally, P., Van Jaarsveld, C. H. M., Potts, H. W. W., & Wardle, J. (2010). How are habits formed: 
Modelling habit formation in the real world. European Journal of Social Psychology, 40 (6), 
998-1009. doi:10.1002/ejsp.674 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
31 
 Lewin, K. (1951). Field theory in social science: Selected theoretical papers . New York: Harper & 
Row. 
Mackenbach, J. D., Rutter, H., Compernolle, S., Glonti, K., Oppert, J.-M., Charreire, H., . . . 
Lakerveld, J. (2014). Obesogenic environments : a systematic review of the association 
between the physical environment and adult weight status, the SPOTLIGHT project. BMC 
public health, 14 (1), 233.  
Markus, H. (1977). Self-schemata and processing information about self. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 35 (2), 63-78. doi:10.1037//0022-3514.35.2.63 
Marlatt, G. A., & George, W. H. (1984). Relapse prevention - introduction and overview of the 
model. British Journal of Addiction, 79 (3), 261-273.  Retrieved from <Go to 
ISI>://WOS:A1984TK29700004 
May, C., & Finch, T. (2009). Implementing, Embedding, and Integrating Practices: An Outline of 
Normalization Process Theory. Sociology-the Journal of the British Sociological Association, 
43(3), 535-554. doi:10.1177/0038038509103208 
May, C. R., Mair, F., Finch, T., MacFarlane, A., Dowrick, C., Treweek, S., . . . Montori, V. M. 
(2009). Development of a theory of implementation and integration: Normalization Process 
Theory. Implementation Science, 4 . doi:10.1186/1748-5908-4-29 
McEachan, R. R. C., Conner, M., Taylor, N. J., & Lawton, R. J. (2011). Prospective prediction of 
health-related behaviours with the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-analysis. Health 
Psychology Review, 5 (2), 97-144.  
McLeroy, K. R., Bibeau, D., Steckler, A., & Glan z, K. (1988). An ecological perspective on health 
promotion programs. Health Education Behavior, 15(4), 351-377.  
Michie, S., Campbell, R., Brown, J., & West, R. (2014). ABC of Behaviour Change Theories. 
London: Silverback Publishing. 
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R ., Parker, D., Walker, A., & Psychological Theory, 
G. (2005). Making psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: a 
consensus approach. Quality & Safety in Health Care, 14 (1), 26-33. 
doi:10.1136/qshc.2004.011155 
Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., & Altman, D. G. (2009). Preferred reporting items for systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses: the PRISMA statement. Annals of Internal Medicine, 151(4), 
264-269.  
Moos, R. H., & Moos, B. S. (2006). Rates and predic tors of relapse after natural and treated remission 
from alcohol use disorders. Addiction, 101 (2), 212-222. doi:10.1111/j.1360-
0443.2006.01310.x 
Muraven, M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2000). Self-Re gulation and Depletion of Limited Resources: Does 
Self-Control Resemble a Muscle? Psychological Bulletin, 126(2), 247-259. doi:I0.I037//0033-
2909.126.2.247 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
32 
 Nederkoorn, C., Houben, K., Hofmann, W., Roefs, A., & Jansen, A. (2010). Control Yourself or Just 
Eat What You Like? Weight Gain Over a Year Is Predicted by an Interactive Effect of 
Response Inhibition and Implicit Preference for Snack Foods. Health Psychology, 29 (4), 389-
393. doi:10.1037/a0019921 
Neff, J. A., & MacMaster, S. A. (2005). Applying  behaviour change models to understand spiritual 
mechanisms underlying change in substance abuse treatment. The American Journal of Drug 
and Alcohol Abuse, 31, 669-684.  
Noar, S. M., & Head, K. J. (2014). Mind the gap: bringing our theories in line with the empirical 
data–a response to commentaries. Health Psychology Review, 8 (1), 65-69.  
Ogden, J., & Hills, L. (2008). Unde rstanding sustained behavior change : the role of life crises and the 
process of reinvention. Health, 12 (4), 419-437. doi:10.1177/1363459308094417 
Panter-Brick, C., Clarke, S. E., Lomas, H., Pinder, M., & Lindsay, S. W. (2006). Culturally 
compelling strategies for behaviour change: A social ecology model and case study in malaria prevention. Social Science & Medicine, 62 , 2810-2825.  
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned Reflexes . London: Oxford University Press. 
Polivy, J., & Herman, C. P. (1985). Dieting and binge eating: A causal analysis. . American 
Psychologist, 40 , 193–204.  
Prestwich, A., Sniehotta, F. F., Whittington, C., Dombrowski, S. U., Rogers, L., & Michie, S. (2014). 
Does theory influence the effectiveness of h ealth behavior interventions? Meta-analysis. 
Health Psychology, 33 (5), 465.  
Prochaska, J. O., & Di Clemente, C. C. (1983) . Stages and processes of self-change of smoking: 
Toward an integrative model of change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology & 
Health, 51(3), 390-395.  
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C., C. , & Norcro ss, J. C. (1992). In search of how people change: 
Applications to addictive behaviors. American Psychologist, 47 (9), 1102-1114.  
Rhodes, R. E. (2014). Improving translational resear ch in building theory: a commentary on Head and 
Noar. Health Psychology Review, 8(1), 57-60.  
Rothman, A. J. (2000). Toward a theory-based  analysis of behavioral maintenance. Health 
Psychology, 19 (1), 64-69. doi:10.1037//0278-6133.19.Suppl1.64 
Rothman, A. J. (2004). "Is there nothing more pr actical than a good theory?": Why innovations and 
advances in health behavior change will arise if  interventions are used to test and refine 
theory. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 1 (1), 11.  
Retrieved from http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/1/1/11 
Rothman, A. J., Baldwin, A. S., & Hertel, A. W. (2004). Self-regulati on and Behavior Change: 
Disentangling Behavioral Initiation and Behavioral Maintenance In R. F. Baumeister & K. D. 
Vohs (Eds.), Handbook of Self-Regulation  (pp. 130-1150). London: The Gulford Press. 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
33 
 Rothman, A. J., Sheeran, P., & Wood, W. (2009). Reflective and Automatic Processes in the Initiation 
and Maintenance of Dietary Change. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 38 , S4-S17. 
doi:10.1007/s12160-009-9118-3 
Rotter, J. B. (1960). Some implications of a social  learning theory for the prediction of goal directed 
behavior from testing procedures. Psychological Review, 67 (5), 301.  
Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the facilitation of intrinsic 
motivation, social development and well-being. American Psychologist, 55 , 68-78.  
Schwarzer, R. (1992). Self-efficacy in the adoption and maintenance of health behaviors: Theoretical 
approaches and a new model. In R. Schwarzer (Ed.), Selfefficacy: Thought control of action  
(pp. 217-243). Washington, DC: Hemisphere. 
Schwarzer, R. (2008). Modeling health behavior change: How to predict and modify the adoption and 
maintenance of health behaviors. Applied Psychology-an International Review-Psychologie 
Appliquee-Revue Internationale, 57 (1), 1-29. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2007.00325.x 
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behaviour.  New York: Macmillan. 
Sniehotta, F. F., Presseau, J., & Araujo-Soares, V. (2015). On the development, evaluation and 
evolution of behavioural theory. Health Psychology Review (just-accepted), 1-23.  
Sniehotta, F. F., Schwarzer, R., Scholz, U., & Schuz , B. (2005). Action planning and coping planning 
for long-term lifestyle change: Theory and assessment. European Journal of Social 
Psychology, 35 (4), 565-576. doi:10.1002/ejsp.258 
Stasiewicz, P. R., & Maisto, S. A. (1993). Two- Factor Avoidance Theory: The Role of Negative 
Affect in the Maintenance of Substance Use and Substance Use Disorder. Behavior Therapy, 
24, 337-356.  
Stevens, M., Bult, P., de Greef, M. H. G., Lemmink, K., & Rispens, P. (1999). Groningen active 
living model (GALM): Stimulating physical  activity in sedentary older adults. Preventive 
Medicine, 29 (4), 267-276. doi:10.1006/pmed.1999.0545 
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impulsive determinants of social behavior. 
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8 (3), 220-247.  
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. (1979). An integrative theory of intergroup conflict. In W. G. Austin & S. 
Worchel (Eds.), The Social Psychology of Intergroup Relations . Monterey, CA: Brooks-Cole. 
Thaler, R. H., & Sunstein, C. R. (2008). Nudge : Yale University Press. 
Thompson, B., & Kinne, S. (1990). Social change th eory: applications to community health. In N. 
Bracht (Ed.), Health promotion at the community level . Newbury Park: Sage Publications. 
Triandis, H. C. (1977). Interpersonal behavior . Monterey: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company. 
Tsai, A. G., & Wadden, T. A. (2005). Systematic review: An evaluation of major commercial weight 
loss programs in the United States. Annals of Internal Medicine, 142 (1), 56-66.  Retrieved 
from <Go to ISI>://WOS:000228366200006 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
34 
 Turner, J. C. (1987). Rediscovering the social group: a Self-Categorization Theory . Oxford: 
Blackwell Ltd. 
Verplanken, B. (2006). Beyond frequenc y: Habit as mental construct. British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 45 , 639-656. doi:10.1348/014466605x49122 
Verplanken, B., & Aarts, H. (1999). Habit, Attit ude, and Planned Behaviour : Is Habit an Empty 
Construct or an Interesting Case of Goal-directed Automaticity? European Review of Social 
Psychology, 10 (1), 101-134. doi:10.1080/14792779943000035 
Verplanken, B., & Orbell, S. (2003). Reflections  on past behavior: A self-report index of habit 
strength. Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 33 (6), 1313-1330. doi:10.1111/j.1559-
1816.2003.tb01951.x 
Verplanken, B., Walker, I., Davis, A., & Jurasek, M.  (2008). Context change and travel mode choice: 
Combining the habit discontinuity and self-activation hypotheses. Journal of Environmental 
Psychology, 28 (2), 121-127. doi:10.1016/j.jenvp.2007.10.005 
Weinstein, N. D. (1988). The Precaution Adoption Process. Health Psychology, 7(4), 355-386. 
doi:10.1037//0278-6133.7.4.355 
Weinstein, N. D., & Sandman, P. M. (1992). A model of the precaution ad option process - evidence 
from home radon testing Health Psychology, 11 (3), 170-180. doi:10.1037/0278-
6133.11.3.170 
Witkiewitz, K., & Marlatt, G. A. (2004). Relapse pr evention for alcohol and drug problems - That was 
Zen, this is Tao. American Psychologist, 59 (4), 224-235. doi:10.1037/0003-066x.59.4.224 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted Manuscript
BEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
35 
  
Figure 1 . Changes in behaviour potential ( likelihood of engaging in a particular behaviour ) over time following initial behaviour change.  02468101214161820
123456789 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 2 0Behaviour potential
Time
New behaviour Prior behaviourBehaviour initiation
B. LapseB.
A. Leading towards  
behaviour maintenance 
A.A. Period when newly 
adopted behaviour is 
the dominant option  
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
36 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
Figure 2. PRISMA 2009 flow diagram (Moher, Liberati, Tetzlaff, & Altman, 2009). Records excluded (n = 54) 
Reasons:  
− Not a behaviour theory 
− No relation to 
behaviour maintenance 
− Not published (Master thesis) 
− Other and/or 
combination of above reasons Screening Included Eligibilit y Identification Records identified 
through database 
searching (n = 120) 
Records after duplicates re moved [(total: n = 171): 
from the ‘Theory Project’ (n = 80); sent by the Theory 
Experts (n = 16); from the da tabase search (n = 75)]  
Full-text of theories 
assessed for eligibility  
(n = 117) Full-text of theories 
excluded (n = 17)  
Reasons:  
− Not a behaviour theory 
(n = 8) 
− No relation to behaviour maintenance 
(n = 5) 
− Theories focusing on specific research participation behaviours, measurements, scales development or programmes develo
pment (n = 4 )Theories included in 
narrative synthesis  
(n = 100 )
Theories included in 
theme validation 
exercise (n = 100) Records screened  
(n = 171) Theories identified 
from the ‘Theory 
Project’ (n = 80) Theories suggested by 
the theory experts 
 (n = 64) 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted Manuscript
BEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
37 
 
New behaviour ST j-1 
Behaviour after change has 
been enacted  
Prior behaviour ST j-1 
Behaviour before change 
has been enacted 
P(New 
Behaviour) ST j 
P(Prior 
Behaviour)  ST j 
New habits  ST j 
Automaticity 
Cue-dependency 
Self-regulation ST j 
Skill, need, and process 
Lapse, relapse and coping 
with behavioural barriers 
Environment  
Opportunity costs, Choice ar chitecture, Cues/contingencie s, Incentives/Disincentives 
Resources ST j 
Stress, Tiredness 
Influence of substances 
Emotions, Ego depletion 
Old habits  STj 
Automaticity 
Cue-dependency 
Maintenance motives ST j 
Behaviour enjoyment 
Satisfaction with outcomes 
Self determination, Identity  Maintenance  
The new behaviour is 
consistenty performed 
over time and contexts 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
38 
 Figure 3. Hypothesised relationships between themes derived from maintenance theories in 
the process of behaviour  change maintenance. 
Note.  ST j describes the psychological situation S defined by feat ures of the environment 
(e.g., available choices, extern al dis(incentives), cues and opportunity costs) and personal 
features (e.g., motivation, auto maticity) at time point T j.  New and prior behaviour are 
competing against each other af ter initial behaviour change.  
 
 
Table 1.  A summary of methods  
Structured theory review – methods summary 
1. Theory identification  From 3 data sources: 
1. Systematic on-line search  2. ’Theory Project’ list of 80 theories 
3. Contact with 40 experts (25 replied)  
2. Inclusion/Exclusion  Criteria and definition of terms  
3. Data Extraction  Including: ID number; theory name, full reference; verbatim 
general statements about behavi our change maintenance (direct 
quote) and explanations of be haviour change maintenance 
(interpretation); intended theoretical application; specified population and/or behaviour  
4. Narrative data Synthesis  A) Testable explanations for behaviour change maintenance 
reviewed in included theories  B) Generation of themes: testab le explanations analysed and 
grouped into theory themes and subthemes C) Theory themes validated (10 health psychology researchers) 
5. Review writing  Review structured around the themes; interconnections between the themes discussed.  
 
 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

Accepted ManuscriptBEHAVIOUR CHANGE MAINTENANCE - THEORY REVIEW. 
39 
 Table 2.  Main theoretical themes relevant to  maintenance identified in the review  
Theme Brief theoretical explanati on Theories included (examples) 
(1) Maintenance  
motives  People tend to maintain their 
behaviour if they have at least one sustained maintenance motive, i.e. they are satisfied with behavioural outcomes, they enjoy engaging in the behaviour; if behaviour is congruent with their identity, beliefs and values.  - Model of behaviour maintenance (Rothman, 2000) changed into a 2 x 2 behaviour change matrix (Rothman, Sheeran & Wood, 2009) 
- Regulatory fit theory (Higgins, 2006) 
- Self-determination theory (Deci & Ryan, 1985; 2008) 
(2) Self-
regulation  People tend to maintain behaviour if they successfully monitor and regulate the newly adopted behaviour and have effective strategies to overcome barriers to the performance of the new behaviour.  - Self-regulation theory (Kanfer & Gaelick, 1991)  
- Relapse prevention theory (Marlatt & Donovan, 2005) 
- Dual process model of self-control (Hofmann et al., 2008) 
(3) Resources  People are successful in 
maintaining behaviour if their psychological and physical resources are plentiful.    - Reflective and impulsive model (Strack & Deutsch, 2004)  
- Self-control theory (Muraven & Baumeister, 2000; Baumeister, 2002) 
- Goal conflict model (Stroebe et al., 2008) 
(4) Habit  People are effective with 
maintaining behaviours which have become habitual and are supported by automatic responses to relevant cues.     - Health-related model of behaviour change (Hunt & Martin, 1988) 
- Habit theory (Verplanken & Aarts, 1999; Verplanken & Orbell, 2003; Verplanken et al., 2008)  
- Process model of lifestyle behaviour change (Greaves, 2012) 
(5) 
Environmental 
and social influences  A supportive environment and social support are important for behaviour change maintenance. People tend to maintain behaviour which is in line with relevant social changes.   - Social cognitive/learning theory (Bandura, 1989) 
- Social change theory (Thompson & Kinne, 1990) 
- Normalisation process theory (May et al., 2007) 
 
Downloaded by [Orta Dogu Teknik Universitesi] at 06:50 09 February 2016 

