Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology and Health
ISSN: 0887-0446 (Print) 1476-8321 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Effects of the Positive Action  programme on
problem behaviours in elementary school
students: A matched-pair randomised control trial
in Chicago
Kin-Kit Li, Isaac Washburn, David L. DuBois, Samuel Vuchinich, Peter Ji,
Vanessa Brechling, Joseph Day, Michael W. Beets, Alan C. Acock, Michael
Berbaum, Frank Snyder & Brian R. Flay
To cite this article:  Kin-Kit Li, Isaac Washburn, David L. DuBois, Samuel Vuchinich, Peter Ji,
Vanessa Brechling, Joseph Day, Michael W. Beets, Alan C. Acock, Michael Berbaum, Frank
Snyder & Brian R. Flay (2011) Effects of the Positive Action  programme on problem behaviours
in elementary school students: A matched-pair randomised control trial in Chicago, Psychology
and Health, 26:2, 187-204, DOI: 10.1080/08870446.2011.531574
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2011.531574
View supplementary material 
Published online: 13 Feb 2011.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 2032
View related articles 
Citing articles: 14 View citing articles 

Psychology and Health
Vol. 26, No. 2, February 2011, 187–204
Effects of the Positive Action programme on problem behaviours
in elementary school students: A matched-pair randomised
control trial in Chicago
Kin-Kit Lia*, Isaac Washburnb, David L. DuBoisc, Samuel Vuchinichb,
Peter Jic, Vanessa Brechlingc, Joseph Dayc, Michael W. Beetsd, Alan
C. Acockb, Michael Berbaumc, Frank Snydereand Brian R. Flaye**
aDepartment of Applied Social Studies, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong;
bDepartment of Human Development and Family Sciences, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA;cInstitute for Health Research and Policy, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60608, USA;dDepartment of Exercise Science,
Arnold School of Public Health, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208 USA;
eDepartment of Public Health, College of Health and Human Sciences,
Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
(Received 25 March 2009; final version received 7 July 2010 )
This study examined the effects of the Positive Action (PA) programme
in Chicago Public Schools on problem behaviours among a cohort ofelementary school students from grade three through grade five. Using a
matched-pair, randomised control design with 14 elementary schools,
approximately 510 fifth-graders self-reported lifetime substance use, seriousviolence-related behaviour, and current bullying and disruptive behaviours.Three-level (i.e. students nested within schools within school pairs)
overdispersed Poisson models were used to examine programme effects on
the number of items endorsed for each of the four outcomes. Findingsindicated that students in the intervention endorsed 31% fewer substance use
behaviours (incidence rate ratio [IRR] ¼0.69), 37% fewer violence-related
behaviours (IRR ¼0.63) and 41% fewer bullying behaviours (IRR ¼0.59),
respectively, compared to students in the control schools. Reduction inreported disruptive behaviours was of a similar magnitude (27%,
IRR¼0.73), but was not statistically significant. These results replicate
findings of an earlier randomised trial of the PA programme and extendevidence of its effectiveness to youth attending large urban school systems.
Keywords: adolescent; matched-pair; substance use; violence; bullying;
disruptive behaviour
Introduction
Violence and substance use are leading public health issues (Johnston, O’Malley,
Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2008; Krug, Dahlberg, Mercy, Zwi, & Lozano, 2002).The initiation of these behaviours can date back as early as middle childhood.
*Corresponding author. Email: ben.li@cityu.edu.hk
**Corresponding author. Email: brian.flay@oregonstate.edu
ISSN 0887–0446 print/ISSN 1476–8321 online
/C2232011 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/08870446.2011.531574http://www.informaworld.com
A recent survey of 3530 third–fifth-graders, for example, found that 22% of the
students reported involvement in bullying or being victimised at school (Glew, Fan,
Katon, Rivara, & Kernic, 2005). A review of national and state-wide surveys
similarly showed that the prevalence of having ever had more than a sip of alcoholwas 10%, 16% and 29% for fourth, fifth and sixth graders, respectively (Donovan,
2007). Involvement in violence or substance use during childhood is clearly a source
for concern. Evidence from longitudinal studies (e.g. Schulenberg & Maggs, 2008),furthermore, indicates that early manifestations of problem behaviour predict
multiple long-term negative behaviour patterns and consequences.
Schools are regarded as an important context for implementing interventions to
reduce problem behaviours. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC),for example, has identified school-based approaches as best practices for aggression
prevention (Thornton, Craft, Dahlberg, Lynch, & Baer, 2000). Timing of interven-
tion is crucial as well given that prevention programmes need to be implementedbefore the onset of a problem (Nation et al., 2003). Andrews, Hampson, Barckley,
Gerrard, and Gibbons (2008) suggested that alcohol and cigarette prevention
programmes can start as early as second and fourth grade, respectively. Elementaryschools clearly afford a promising context for interventions oriented towards
preventing the onset of these and related problem behaviours.
Many problem behaviours co-occur and share some common causes (Brady,
Tschann, Pasch, Flores, & Ozer, 2008; Flay, Snyder, & Petraitis, 2009).Accumulating research also supports the usefulness of comprehensive programmes
that focus on multiple facets of character and social development for reducing
multiple health risk behaviours (Flay & Allred, 2003; Hawkins, Kosterman,Catalano, Hill, & Abbott, 2005). School-based intervention programmes that are
universal (i.e. programmes administered to all students in a classroom regardless of
individual risks) demonstrate similar potential to reduce rates of substance use andviolence (Hahn et al., 2007) and to have long-term benefits (Hawkins et al., 2005).
The theory underlying these types of programmes often includes changes in the social
environment, consistent with the syndemic perspective (Singer, 1994) and other
comprehensive theories of health behaviour (Flay et al., 2009).
Positive Action programme
The Positive Action (PA) programme targets many influences on behaviour, both
distal (e.g. school climate, teacher classroom management) and proximal
(e.g. thoughts and feelings, self-efficacy) that are included as constructs in multiple
health behaviour theories (Ajzen, 1991; Bandura, 1986; Hawkins & Weis, 1985).Many of these theories and perspectives are integrated into the Theory of Triadic
Influence (TTI; Flay et al., 2009).
School-level analyses (relying on school report card data) using quasi-
experimental, matched-control designs suggested the effectiveness of the PAprogramme for enhancing academic achievement and school involvement and
reducing disciplinary referrals and violence in multiple locations (Flay & Allred,
2003; Flay, Allred, & Ordway, 2001). A recent evaluation of the programme in a4-year trial in Hawaii that extended this research to a multilevel framework
(i.e. individual data nested within schools) and the use of a matched-pair,
randomised-control design (i.e. schools with similar characteristics were matched188 K.-K. Li et al.
into pairs and then schools within a pair were allocated randomly to either
programme or control conditions) revealed significant reductions in fifth-grade
student-reported substance use, violence and sexual behaviours in PA schools
compared to control schools (Beets et al., 2009). This latter type of more rigorousresearch design provides the type of internal validity evidence that is critical toassessing the effectiveness of preventive interventions (Flay et al., 2005). It is
important, however, for initial findings to be replicated, ideally with differing
populations so as to better establish the external validity regarding an intervention’seffectiveness. Evidence of external validity is particularly important for translation of
research into practice and for decision makers and practitioners (Glasgow &
Emmons, 2007).
Purpose of the study
This study had two major aims. The first was to replicate the existing evidence of
effectiveness of the PA programme for reducing problem behaviours using the same
multilevel framework and matched-pair, randomised-control design as in the Hawaii
trial (Beets et al., 2008, 2009). The second aim was to examine the effectiveness ofPA for problem behaviour reduction in a different population, elementary schoolstudents in a large urban school system – the Chicago Public Schools (CPS).
Evidence suggests that students in urban schools may have higher levels of
aggression, delinquency and drug use when compared to those in rural schools (e.g.
Farrell, Sullivan, Esposito, Meyer, & Valois, 2005). A number of societal processesmay lead to such differences (Morales & Bonilla, 1993), including differentialenvironmental exposure to stressors and the social consequences of poverty and
inequality (Noguera, 2008). For instance, compared to students in rural and
suburban schools, students in urban schools report higher exposure to violence(Campbell & Schwarz, 1996). In this study, as noted, one of our aims is to testwhether the beneficial PA intervention effects generalise to urban populations.
Method
Design
The Chicago trial of PA was under the auspices of the Social and Character
Development (SACD) cooperative agreement funded by the Institute for Education
Sciences of the US Department of Education. Chicago was one of seven sitesnationwide evaluating the effects of different school-based interventions designed topromote students’ SACD. Mathematica Policy Research (MPR) provided and
administered a core set of survey questions to all the sites (Social and Character
Development Research Consortium, in preparation). Site-specific questions werealso included. The Chicago trial of PA took place in 14 CPS elementary schoolsduring the 2004–2005 through 2006–2007 academic years, seven in the control
condition and seven in the intervention condition. The study followed a single cohort
of students who were third graders when treatment schools began implementing theprogramme. New students joining the grade level of this cohort in subsequent years
were also included and followed. Five assessments were conducted during the study
period: Fall 2004 (baseline assessment), Spring 2005, Fall 2005, Spring 2006 and 2007(end of grade 5). Students for whom we obtained active parental consent andPsychology and Health 189
personal assent for study participation and who provided data on substance use,
violence, bullying and disruptive behaviours at the final assessment were includedin the analyses. Although this study focused on negative behaviours, various
psychological measures (e.g. self-efficacy, beliefs about aggression) and measures of
prosocial behaviours were also included in the assessment. The results of the impactof the programme on these measures are available upon request. A high rate ofreturn for parental consent forms by students (98%) was achieved by a class
incentive and class visits and the parent affirmative rate (79%) was satisfactory (Ji
et al., 2006). Rates of consent and assent and of data being obtained at baseline andat the final assessment were not significantly different across treatment and controlconditions (Ji et al., 2006). Assessments and procedures were approved by the
Institutional Review Boards of MPR, the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC) and
Oregon State University (OSU).
School and community context
In the 2006–2007 school year, Hispanic and Black students accounted for 39% and
49% of the CPS student population, respectively, and 75% of CPS students wereeligible for free or reduced-price lunch (Tang & Sable, 2009). Among students in
grades 3–8, only 62% met or exceeded standards on the Illinois Standards
Achievement Test (ISAT) in 2007 (Chicago Public Schools [CPS], 2009). About16% of CPS students are English language learners, ranging from those who do notspeak English to those with limited English abilities (CPS, 2010).
Participating schools
Participating schools were drawn from a pool of 483 K-6 and K-8 CPS elementary
schools. Several exclusion criteria were applied both to eliminate schools with
extreme characteristics and to include schools with higher risks of problembehaviours (Figure 1). Using these criteria, 68 schools were eligible. These schoolswere invited to attend information sessions about the PA programme and the
research study. Representatives from 36 schools attended an information session.
Eighteen of these schools agreed to participate in the study with the understandingthat they would be matched with another suitable school in the pool of 18 andrandomly assigned to conditions (see Figure 1 for the matching criteria). Using this
process, seven well-matched pairs of schools were created. All 14 schools in these
matched pairs were successfully recruited into the study. Baseline equivalencebetween the programme and control conditions was evident at the school level on thefull range of available school and neighbourhood characteristics (Ji, DuBois, Flay, &
Brechling, 2008). Schools in the control condition received the PA programme and
materials after the end of the trial period.
Student participants
As noted, schools, not students, were the unit of randomisation. All schools were
retained throughout the study, but student participation was highly variable acrossyears. The mobility of students (i.e. moving in or out of schools) poses challenges for190 K.-K. Li et al.
school-based longitudinal studies. Because the outcome measures at the end of the
study were of utmost importance for evaluating programme effectiveness, allstudents who completed these measures were included in the analyses.
Because some of the data reported herein were restricted-use data (Note 1
online), all Ns are rounded to the nearest 10. At the end of the 3-year study period,
approximately 510 fifth graders completed the questionnaires with the outcomemeasures. Slightly more than half of these students ( n/C25290; 57%) were also part of
the original sample of approximately 590 students at baseline. The final sample
included about 250 control (49% girls) and 260 intervention (51% girls) students.
The highest percentage self-identified their ethnicity as African-American (46%).The remaining ethnic groups included Hispanic (27%), White non-Hispanic (7%),Asian (3%) and other or mixed (17%).
Figure 1. Diagram for participating schools and students.Psychology and Health 191
Intervention
In this trial, programme schools received the K-8 portion of the PA classroom
curriculum and school/staff training from the programme developer, plus kits
for school preparation, school-wide climate development, counsellors and familyclasses. The K-8 PA classroom curriculum is scoped and sequenced, consisting of
over 140 15-min, age-appropriate lessons per grade that are designed to be taught
4 days per week. More elaborated descriptions of the programme and unit contentscan be found in Flay and Allred (2010) and at the programme website
(www.positiveaction.net). Measures and materials are also available from the first
author.
During each school year, the programme developer provided teacher and staff
training to each school in the programme condition – approximately 4 h in the first
year and 2 h in subsequent years. In addition, each year, we conducted multiple
workshops for key players in the programme schools to provide further training onthe school-wide components of the programme and to share experiences. We
provided support for teachers and staff during the entire study period through
individual consultation with a PA Implementation Coordinator. Visits by theImplementation Coordinator assessed the extent to which the programme compo-
nents were in place, identified potential obstacles, such as staff turnover, which could
potentially compromise implementation quality, and provided technical support tohelp overcome obstacles and enhance programme fidelity. We also attempted
to provide regular consultation with principals and other school administrators to
ensure that the PA curriculum and other programme components were implementedin adherence to the guidelines established by the programme developer. Finally, to
enhance fidelity of implementation with our study cohort students in particular, we
held a workshop with teachers of these students during both the second and thirdyears of the study. All except these final workshops are standard supports that
schools could purchase from Positive Action, Inc. Incentives were given to the
participating schools for administrative support and to the teachers and parents forcompleting the surveys (Note 2 online).
Measures
Programme implementation
All teachers in the intervention schools were asked to complete a Unit
Implementation Report at the end of each of the six units of the programme, that
is, approximately every 6 weeks. The report was completed on the web and took
teachers 5–10 min each time.
Lifetime prevalence of substance use and serious violence-related behaviour
Researcher-developed survey questions regarding students’ lifetime substance use
and serious violence-related behaviours (local site items) were not developmentally
appropriate for younger students and, therefore, were administered only at the end
of the study when students had reached fifth grade. Similar items have been used inprevious studies (Beets et al., 2009; US Department of Health and Human Services,
2008). Each item started with a question stem, ‘Have you ever’, and continued with
a specific behaviour descriptor. These included (1) smoked a cigarette, (2) drank192 K.-K. Li et al.
alcohol, (3) gotten drunk on alcohol, (4) used marijuana, (5) used other more serious
drugs, (6) carried a knife, (7) threatened to cut or stab someone, (8) cut or stabbedsomeone on purpose, (9) been asked to join a gang, (10) hung out with gang members
and (11) been a member of a gang. Response options were 1 (No), 2 (Yes, once), 3
(Yes, 2–5 times) and 4 (Yes, more than 5 times). Due to the low prevalence rates ofthe latter three responses, each item was dichotomised (0/1) to represent ‘No, never’versus ‘ever’. We then created a count variable for both substance use (0–5) and
serious violence-related behaviours (0–6), indicating the number of behaviours in
which the student reported ever having engaged.
Bullying and disruptive behaviours
Bullying and disruptive behaviours were assessed at each time point of the study
using 12 items. Bullying behaviours were measured using six items selected from theAggression Scale (Orpinas & Frankowski, 2001) in which children responded as to
how often in the past 2 weeks they had engaged in verbal or physical aggression at
school (e.g. teased others, shoved others). Internal consistency reliability of the scalewas high for the present sample ( /C11¼0.81 and 0.88 at baseline and follow-up,
respectively). The Frequency of Delinquent Behavior Scale (Dunford & Elliott, 1984)
was used to measure disruptive behaviours, with items modified to refer to the school
context. Children were asked to respond to six items about how often in the pastcouple of weeks they had engaged in different problem behaviours at school(e.g. taking something at school that belonged to others, skipping class). Reliability
of this scale also was satisfactory ( /C11¼0.76 and 0.81 at baseline and follow-up,
respectively). Response options were 0 (Never), 1 (Once or twice), 2 (A few times)and 3 (Many times) for all items. To facilitate a focus on relatively recurrentbehaviours as well as comparison with the measures of substance use and serious
violence-related behaviour, the former three response options were combined to
create a dichotomous scale (0 ¼None to a few times; 1 ¼Many times). Items were
then summed within domain to create separate count variables for bullying anddisruptive behaviours (0–6).
Covariates
To reduce potential confounding effects and increase statistical precision, self-
reported age, gender, ethnicity and measures of baseline problem behaviours were
included in analyses as control variables. For baseline problem behaviour, a meanscore was computed by averaging the 12 bullying and disruptive behaviour itemsusing the original response options (0–3). We conducted sensitivity analyses using
different ways of controlling for baseline problem behaviour (e.g. one vs.two
variables, continuous vs.count variables); results in all instances were consistent with
those with report below.
Analysis
Statistical analyses consisted of five steps. In step 1, multiple imputations were
created to handle the missing values using switching regression (Royston, 2004)
implemented in Stata (StataCorp, 2007). Multiple imputation produces less biased
estimates than traditional approaches to handling missing data such as list-wisePsychology and Health 193
deletion or mean substitution when data are not missing completely at random
(Acock, 2005). Rather, multiple imputation assumes data are missing at random and
appropriate mechanisms are included as covariates in the imputation model.
An improved strategy for analysing multiply imputed data called ‘multipleimputation, then deletion (MID)’ (von Hippel, 2007) was adopted in which allcases were used for imputations but cases with imputed outcome variables were
deleted from the analyses. In situations where missing values on the outcome
variables are substantial and the imputation model for the outcome variables isdifficult to specify, as in this study, MID is preferable. The extra information
produced from cases with missing outcomes is useful for imputing missing covariates
in other cases, but cases with imputed outcomes have nothing but random variationto contribute to the subsequent analysis (von Hippel, 2007).
For this study, the imputation model included students’ age, sex, ethnicity, school
affiliation, baseline problem behaviours, problem behaviours at waves 2, 3 and 4(computed the same as baseline problem behaviour) and an outcome composite score
computed by averaging all 23 dichotomised items that comprised the four outcome
behaviours at the final wave. A single composite outcome score was used rather thanmultiple scale-level or item-level scores to reduce missing data that needed to be
handled by the algorithm. Results of sensitivity analyses showed that various ways of
representing the outcomes in the imputation models did not alter the magnitude orsignificance of estimated programme effects. As suggested by Rubin (1987), fiveimputation datasets were generated. Using the MID procedures (von Hippel, 2007),
all of the cases with imputed outcomes at grade 5 were deleted after the multiple
imputation. Students who joined the schools after the beginning of the study(i.e. newcomers) accounted for the highest proportion of the imputed values onbaseline problem behaviours, which was equivalent to 42% of the cases in the
analysed data ( n/C25510). All of the subsequent analyses were conducted using these
imputed datasets. Parameter estimates were combined across the imputations usingRubin’s rules (Rubin, 1987).
In step 2, we tested the equivalence of our student cohort between PA schools
and control schools. We have previously reported equivalence at the school level
(Ji et al., 2008); however, because equivalence at the school level does not guarantee
equivalence at the individual level, multilevel analyses were conducted to examinewhether cohort (grade 3) students in the PA schools were different from students in
the control schools on demographics and baseline problem behaviours.
In step 3, potential differences between stayers (i.e. students present at baseline
and at the end of the study), dropouts (i.e. students present at baseline but not at the
end of the study) and newcomers (i.e. students not in the study at baseline butpresent at the end) were examined on baseline problem behaviour and end-of-studyproblem behaviours. These analyses served to explore the possibility of alternative
explanations due to the mobility of students (Hansen, Collins, Malotte, Johnson, &
Fielding, 1985). To test whether stayers were the same as dropouts, multilevelregressions of baseline problem behaviour on stayer versus dropout group
membership were conducted. Stayers and newcomers were compared on the four
outcome measures at the final wave using multilevel overdispersed Poisson models.For the analyses of stayers and newcomers, students in the PA schools were notincluded, as stayers in the PA schools were expected to be different than the
newcomers due to the intervention.194 K.-K. Li et al.
In step 4 of the analysis, a series of multilevel Poisson models, each of which
included an overdispersion estimate (explained below), was conducted to examinethe effects of the PA programme on problem behaviours; analyses were conducted. Asuccessful matched-pair design (i.e. where variation between pairs far exceeds thevariation within pairs) can enhance statistical power by matching units that are likelyto be similar on the outcomes into pairs (Raudenbush, Martinez, & Spybrook, 2007).In this study, problem behaviours were tested using three-level models with students(Level 1) nested within schools (Level 2) and nested within pairs (Level 3).Introducing a third-level random effect partitioned the between-pair variation fromthe within-pair variation; hence, intervention effects could be tested with greaterprecision given that the pairs were well matched (Feng, Diehr, Peterson, &McLerran, 2001). Due to the relatively low frequency of problem behaviours, thevariances of the outcome scales were larger than the mean; therefore, analyses testingfor overdispersion were conducted (Long & Freese, 2006). A random effect at thestudent-level was introduced into the Poisson models accounting for overdispersion(Rabe-Hesketh & Skrondal, 2005).
The significance of the programme effects in the multilevel models computed in
the statistical package, Stata, was tested against a standard normal distribution,which assumes a sufficiently large number of schools. Because only 14 schools wereincluded, a set of sensitivity analyses using an adjusted df (12) was conducted toprovide more conservative tests of the programme effects for each outcomebehaviour (Snijders & Bosker, 1999). Because the tests of significance using anadjusted df could not be combined using Rubin’s rules (Rubin, 1987), the ranges ofthep-values for each outcome are reported.
In step 5, exploratory analyses were conducted comparing the programme effects
for stayers and newcomers. Because stayers received more years of interventioncompared to newcomers, results of the analyses were relevant to the question ofwhether programme effects depended on degree of programme exposure (i.e. a dose–response relationship). Like the analyses for the programme effects, multileveloverdispersed Poisson models were used. A binary variable representing themembership in the stayer (0) or newcomer group (1) and an interaction betweenthis variable and intervention condition was included in the models. Sensitivityanalyses using an adjusted df (12) were conducted.
Results
Baseline equivalence
Sample characteristics at baseline are presented online (Table S1). Gender compo-
sition and age at baseline were not significantly different between the programmeand the control conditions, whereas differences on ethnicity composition weresignificant. /C31
2(4)¼10.24, p50.05. There were more African-American students and
fewer students in the other/mixed ethnicity group for the control condition comparedto the PA condition. Controlling for demographic variables and clustering ofstudents, PA students were not significantly different from control students in thereported rates of problem behaviours, B¼0.13, ns (including stayers and
newcomers; n/C25510).Psychology and Health 195
Stayers/movers equivalence
Across the multiple imputations, no significant difference on baseline problem
behaviours was found between stayers and dropouts, B¼/C00.02, ns. Comparisons
between stayers and newcomers in the control schools on the behavioural outcomesalso showed non-significant differences (incidence rate ratios [IRRs] ¼0.73–0.88).
These results are in the direction of stayers endorsing fewer items on problembehaviours than dropouts and newcomers, although as noted the differences werenot statistically significant.
Descriptive statistics at the final wave
Consistent with the sample characteristics at baseline, differences on ethnicity were
found between the programme and the control groups, /C31
2(4)¼11.64, p50.05, at
grade 5. The count frequency of the problem behaviours showed the clear patterns oflong-tailed distributions. At fifth grade, about 35% of the students reporting havingused at least one substance, and a similar proportion of students endorsed at leastone violent behaviour. About 30% and 18% of students reported currently engagingin at least one bullying behaviour and disruptive behaviour, respectively.
Programme implementation
There was variability between schools in all of the implementation indices
(i.e. programme benchmarks), especially in first year, with improvements overtime (Table S2 online). By the end of third year, one school was still implementingat a low level (meeting programme benchmarks at a level below 50%, on average,across all benchmarks), four at a moderate level (meeting programme benchmarksat levels between 50% and 60%) and two at moderate to high levels(meeting programme benchmarks at a level between 60% and 70%).
Outcome analyses
Overdispersed Poisson models significantly improved the model fit compared with
Poisson models without overdispersion, p50.001, for all likelihood ratio tests.
Results of primary outcome analyses, as given in Table 1, showed students in the PAschools endorsed significantly fewer items for substance use (IRR ¼0.69 [0.50–0.97]),
serious violence (IRR ¼0.63 [0.45–0.88]) and bullying behaviours (IRR ¼0.59
[0.37–0.92]). PA students also reported engaging in fewer disruptive behaviours,IRR¼0.73 (0.43–1.24), p¼0.24, although this was not statistically significant.
When an adjusted df (12) was used for testing programme effects, the ranges of the
p-values for the programme effects on the count outcomes across imputation
datasets were 0.05–0.06 for substance use, 0.02 for violence, 0.03–0.05 for bullying,and 0.24–0.31 for disruptive behaviours. The positive programme effects can betranslated into 31% reduction in substance use behaviour, 36% reduction in violencebehaviour, 41% reduction bullying behaviours and 27% (not significant) reductionin disruptive behaviours.196 K.-K. Li et al.
Table 1. Estimates of three-level overdispersed Poisson models ( n/C25500, for substance use and serious violence-related behaviour; n/C25500, for bullying
behaviour and disruptive behaviour).
Substance use Serious violence-related behaviour Bullying behaviour Disruptive behaviour
IRRa(95% CI) IRR (95% CI) IRR (95% CI) IRR (95% CI)
Fixed effects
Problem behaviour at baseline 1.46 (1.01–2.09) 1.54 (1.00–2.39) 1.65 (0.90–3.03) 2.18 (1.02–4.65)
Gender (0 ¼girls; 1 ¼boys) 1.75 (1.31–2.34) 2.02 (1.47–2.79) 2.14 (1.44–3.16) 2.35 (1.40–3.93)
Age at baseline (years) 1.46 (1.14–1.88) 1.75 (1.33–2.31) 1.56 (1.12–2.18) 1.99 (1.30–3.05)Ethnic groups (reference: Black) – – – – – – – –
White 0.79 (0.36–1.71) 0.44 (0.18–1.10) 0.25 (0.08–0.75) 0.25 (0.06–1.08)
Hispanic 1.20 (0.78–1.86) 0.77 (0.46–1.31) 0.36 (0.19–0.67) 0.70 (0.36–1.36)Asian 0.79 (0.28–2.22) 0.60 (0.19–1.86) 0.32 (0.08–1.29) 0.20 (0.02–2.11)Other 1.39 (0.91–2.14) 1.16 (0.72–1.87) 1.05 (0.61–1.83) 1.15 (0.59–2.24)
Positive Action vs.control 0.69 (0.50–0.97) 0.63 (0.45–0.88) 0.59 (0.37–0.92) 0.73 (0.43–1.24)
Intercept 0.01 (0.00–0.10) 0.00 (0.00–0.03) 0.01 (0.00–0.11) 0.00 (0.00–0.01)
Est. SE Est. SE Est. SE Est. SE
Random effectsPair-level ( n
pair¼7) 0.27 0.14 0.35 0.14 0.21 0.23 0.04 0.63
School-level ( nschool¼14) 0.15 0.17 0.03 0.53 0.21 0.24 0.11 0.64
Individual-levela0.70 0.11 1.00 0.10 1.32 0.12 1.42 0.17
Notes: Est., estimate. Results were derived from five multiply imputed datasets and combined using Rubin’s rules (Rubin, 1987). The statistically
significant programme effects ( p50.05, two-tailed) are given in bold face.
aFixed effects are presented in IRR for better interpretation. Random effects were averaged across the imputations and are presented in the unit of
standard deviation.Psychology and Health 197
Differential programme effects associated with programme exposure
For the analyses examining differential programme effects associated with variations
in programme exposure, the interaction between group membership (stayers vs.
newcomers) and programme conditions was not significant for three of the fouroutcome measures at follow-up: substance use (IRR ¼0.81 [0.45–1.45]), serious
violence (IRR ¼0.94 [0.50–1.78]) and disruptive behaviours (IRR ¼0.43 [0.16–1.15],
p¼0.09). The interaction was significant for bullying behaviours (IRR ¼0.44
[0.21–0.96]), with programme effects stronger for newcomers (IRR ¼0.37) compared
to stayers (IRR ¼0.83). When the df ¼12 was used, there were no interaction effects
for any of the outcome measures.
Discussion
The Chicago trial was the second study to evaluate the PA programme using a
multilevel framework and a matched-pair, randomised-control design. Findings ofthis study extend the experimental evidence of effectiveness of the PA programmereported for the Hawaii trial (Beets et al., 2009). Specifically, fifth-grade studentsreported 31%, 36%, 41% and 27% less lifetime substance use, lifetime violence,bullying behaviours and disruptive behaviours after 3 years of PA.
The observed reductions in disruptive behaviours, although in the expected
direction, were not statistically significant. Although problem behaviours acrossdiverse areas co-occur and likely share common causes (e.g. Brady et al., 2008), theremay be substantial non-overlapping variation for each behaviour (Guilamo-Ramos,
Litardo, & Jaccard, 2005). Substance use, violence and bullying are all health
compromising behaviours, either to oneself or others, whereas disruptive behavioursare more oriented towards rule violations. Disruptive children over time may becomerejected by peers (Ladd, Price, & Hart, 1990), which may lead to distrust of peers andeventual alienation from family and school (Slough & McMahon, 2008). Futuredevelopment of the PA programme might focus on components to reduce disruptivebehaviours more effectively. For instance, the content of the unit on social/emotionalPAs for getting along with others includes development of a code of conduct andcommunity service. These ideas could be extended to various classroom and schoolactivities to further encourage good citizenship.
Meta-analyses have shown a mean effect size of 0.24 (SD ¼0.30) for school-based
substance-use prevention programmes with interactive components (Tobler et al.,2000), effect sizes of 0.20–0.35 for the impact of universal programmes for youth onaggressive/disruptive behaviours (Wilson & Lipsey, 2007) and effect sizes of 0.15–0.31for universal school-based social and emotional learning programmes on conductproblems (Payton et al., 2008). The effect sizes observed in this study, which rangefrom 0.27 to 0.41, are comparable to the upper end of the effects observed in these
meta-analyses. In this and the Hawaii trial (Beets et al., 2009), PA lessons were
delivered for 15 min each school day for 3 or 4 years. Students started the programmeat a young age and most of them lived in high-poverty neighbourhoods. These factorsmay partially explain the relatively large effect sizes observed as time-intensiveprogrammes as well as those that focus on younger age and lower socioeconomicstatus students have been associated with larger effects on problem behaviours inschool-based programmes (Tobler et al., 2000; Wilson & Lipsey, 2007). Furtherdiscussion comparing this trial and the Hawaii trial can be found online (Note 3).198 K.-K. Li et al.
Results generally indicated that programme effects did not differ significantly by
the degree of programme exposure among students in the programme schools.The findings suggest that programme effects extended to those who received lessof the intervention. This lack of evidence of a dose-response relationship has at leastthree possible explanations. First, newcomers, as students entering a new school,
might have been more open to and accepting of the programme curriculum. Second,
the PA curriculum may have been implemented with greater fidelity over time and,hence, programme effects could have been facilitated for newcomers for this reason.It is possible, too, that effects were hindered to some degree for stayers who mighthave been habituated to earlier, less effective forms of the programme’s implemen-tation. Third, and most likely in our opinion, the programme led to changes in theschool-wide climate, including the behaviour of the students and reinforcement ofpositive behaviours by teachers, that new students adjusted to relatively quickly
when they entered the schools where it was being implemented.
A substantial proportion of teachers in this research reported that they did not
believe that the PA programme was very or extremely likely to improve academics orstudent character (Table S2 online). In the Hawaii trial, Beets et al. (2008) found thatattitudes towards PA were associated with school climate and teachers’ beliefsregarding their responsibility to teach SACD concepts. With direct relevance to thesefindings, there appeared to be less than ideal levels of higher level administrativesupport for implementation of programmes such as PA within the school district in
this trial. For example, many teachers informally communicated that they felt
pressured to comply with district and building directives oriented towards meetingNo Child Left Behind (NCLB) standards and as a result did not feel that they hadtime to implement the programme at expected levels, thus depriving them of theopportunity to potentially develop more favourable impressions of its potentialeffectiveness. Consequently, academic performance might have been prioritised overSACD as the primary responsibilities of the teachers. In addition, some teachersreported that they already were implementing SACD activities similar to the PA
programme. This may have fostered an impression that the programme was limited
in what it could offer beyond what they already had been doing.
From this and the Hawaii study, we have come to believe that it takes a much
longer period of time for many low-performing schools to fully adopt and implementa comprehensive programme than it did previously and, indeed, that a high level ofprogramme fidelity may be a largely unobtainable goal for many schools. Along withother comprehensive school reform programme developers and researchers(e.g. Fullan, 2001; Gorman et al., 2007), we believe that under recent conditions,
many under-performing schools need 3–7 years to fully adopt and implement a
comprehensive programme and see substantial benefits from it. In the current trial,most of the teachers (91% by the end of the intervention) could identify the state’sand district’s curriculum standards as being embedded in the PA lessons. Instead oftaking away the instructional time, PA lessons may serve as readily availableresources to facilitate the achievement of established educational standards whenmore fully adopted. Gaining more support for the programme from the higher leveladministration and developing a school-wide climate that holds teachers more
accountable for the SACD of the students may contribute to a higher level of
implementation (Beets et al., 2008).
During the course of the intervention, re-training sessions were offered every year
to account for teacher turnover as a potential factor detracting from implementationPsychology and Health 199
quality during the trial. Broader questions as to the sustainability of a relatively
complex (i.e. multi-component) intervention such as PA once this type of external
implementation support has ended are critically important. Clearly, sustained
implementation has key implications for the potential of the PA programme to bedelivered with acceptable fidelity on a larger, system-wide scale and thus yieldsubstantial benefits for a school system’s overall student population on a long-term
basis. Investigation of these issues should be a priority in future research.
Limitations
There are several limitations of this research. First, the study did not have baseline
data for about half of the sample. Rather than ignore the baseline data that were
present, our strategy of using well-established multiple imputation techniques to
estimate baseline values provided an important statistical control that provided amore accurate evaluation of intervention effects. Second, a self-report of negativebehaviours was used as a basis for outcome measures. Because most of the negativebehaviours would be considered undesirable (indeed some are illegal) for some
segments of the sample, and probably socially desirable among the antisocial
segments of the sample, it is likely that there was some measurement error. Reportsfrom others (e.g. teachers, parents), from school records for disruptive and violence-related behaviours, and from laboratory tests for substance use would provide more
precise measures. Third, as the study included only a relatively small number of
schools, it was not possible to incorporate consideration of other school-levelpredictors, besides the intervention condition, that might influence the negativebehaviours, potentially in interaction with the PA programme. Fourth, the mobility
of students in this study was relatively high, thus potentially limiting generalisability
of our findings to school populations with less mobility. It seems most likely thathigh levels of mobility serve to attenuate programme effects due to reduced exposureto the intervention among newcomers. Such circumstances, in any event, reflect real-
world situations that make longitudinal evaluations of school-based interventions
very challenging. Finally, the measures of lifetime prevalence of substance use andserious violence-related behaviour used in this research were context-free. Futurestudies can explore with whom and where these behaviours take place to furtherunderstanding of their situational determinants and correlates.
Conclusion
For better integration of research and practice in public health, Glasgow and
Emmons (2007) suggested ‘do not expect a program to work perfectly initially, butplan for adaptation and refinement to fit local conditions and emerging issues’
(p. 427). Understanding those differences contributes to developing a completely
generalisable intervention. More well-designed evaluation of interventions withattention to the degree to which effects generalise across diverse contexts will be veryuseful in informing the selection and adaptation of effective programmes by decision
makers and practitioners and hence closing the gap between research and practice.
Findings of this study may be informative for identifying emerging issues for futureadaptation and refinement of the programme and others like it.200 K.-K. Li et al.
Despite much previous research, we still do not have prevention or SACD
programmes that produce the kind of effects, we would like or that do all that theorysuggests is possible. The PA programme is one that comes close, in our estimation, toincorporating most of the factors that current theory and empirical data suggest forimproved prevention and SACD. However, despite these characteristics and the
positive results reported previously, this trial is only the second randomised trial of
the PA programme. Furthermore, the programme’s theoretical basis has beendeveloped, at least in part, after the fact, and there are no studies yet that assess theeffectiveness of the programme in changing the presumed mediator variables or thatsystematically investigate gender, risk status and other factors as potentialmoderators of programme impact. In this study, there was evidence of ampleroom for improvement in levels of programme implementation. As such, thepotential exists for programme effects to continue to improve in schools using PA forseveral years due not only to greater levels of student exposure, but also gains inthe level and integrity of implementation.
Replication studies such as this can help identify potential moderating environ-
mental or contextual factors in successful programmes; however, empirically testing
these moderating factors requires large-scale studies with multiple sites of interven-
tion. We agree with Glasgow, Lichtenstein, and Marcus (2003) that increasingfunding on the external validity evidence of intervention programmes could play animportant role in narrowing the research–practice gap.
Acknowledgements
The findings reported here are based on research funded by the Institute of Education Sciences
(IES), US Department of Education, under cooperative agreement R215S020218 as part of theSACD Research Programme. The SACD Research Programme is a collaboration among IES,the CDC’s Division of Violence Prevention, Mathematica Policy Research Inc. (MPR) andawardees of SACD cooperative agreements (Children’s Institute, New York University,Oregon State University, University at Buffalo-SUNY, University of Maryland, University ofNorth Carolina-Chapel Hill and Vanderbilt University).
The SACD research programme includes a multi-programme evaluation data collected by
MPR and complementary research study data collected by each grantee. The findings reportedhere are based partly on the Chicago portion of the multi-programme data and thecomplementary research data collected by the University of Illinois and OSU (Brian Flay,Principal Investigator) under the SACD programme. The inclusion of the (Chicago portion of)
the multi-site data, which are restricted-use data licensed from the US Department of
Education, requires that all Ns be rounded to the nearest 10. These findings may differ from
the results reported for the SACD multi-programme evaluation. The findings presented in thisarticle may be based on different sample sizes of children, classrooms and teachers, outcomemeasures and/or analytic strategies seeking to answer different research questions.
Brian Flay and David DuBois conceived the study and obtained funding, David DuBois
and UIC staff oversaw programme implementation, the programme developer (Carol G.Allred) provided teacher/staff training, UIC and MPR staff collected all data, Brian Flay andOSU co-investigators and staff conducted data analysis, Kin-Kit Li wrote the first draft of thearticle and all investigators and staff participated in article revisions.
The findings and conclusions in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the official position of the IES, CDC, MPR or every Consortium member, nor does
mention of trade names, commercial products or organisations imply endorsement by the USGovernment.
We are extremely grateful to the participating CPS schools, their principals, teachers,
students and parents. We also thank the CPS Research Review Board and Office ofPsychology and Health 201
Specialised Services, especially Dr Renee Grant-Mitchell and Dr Inez Drummond, for their
invaluable support of this research.
Declaration of interest: The research described herein was done using the programme, the
training and technical support of Positive Action, Inc. Investigators and all research activitieswere supported financially by the IES research grant. Dr Flay’s spouse holds a significantfinancial interest in Positive Action, Inc. Issues regarding conflict of interest were reported tothe relevant institutions and appropriately managed following the institutional guidelines.
References
Acock, A.C. (2005). Working with missing values. Journal of Marriage and Family, 67 ,
1012–1028.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organization Behavior and Human Decision
Processes, 50 , 179–211.
Andrews, J.A., Hampson, S.E., Barckley, M., Gerrard, M., & Gibbons, F.X. (2008). The
effect of early cognitions on cigarette and alcohol use during adolescence. Psychology
of Addictive Behaviors, 22 , 96–106.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory .
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Beets, M.W., Flay, B.R., Vuchinich, S., Acock, A.C., Li, K.-K., & Allred, C. (2008). School
climate and teachers’ beliefs and attitudes associated with implementation of the Positive
Action program: A diffusion of innovations model. Prevention Science, 9 , 264–275.
Beets, M.W., Flay, B.R., Vuchinich, S., Snyder, F.J., Acock, A., Li, K.-K., ..., Durlak, J.
(2009). Use of a social and character development program to prevent substance use,
violent behaviors, and sexual activity among elementary-school students in Hawaii.American Journal of Public Health, 99 , 1438–1445.
Brady, S.S., Tschann, J.M., Pasch, L.A., Flores, E., & Ozer, E.J. (2008). Violence involvement,
substance use, and sexual activity among Mexican-American and European-American
adolescents. Journal of Adolescent Health, 43 , 285–295.
Campbell, C., & Schwarz, D.F. (1996). Prevalence and impact of exposure to interpersonal
violence among suburban and urban middle. Pediatrics, 98 , 396.
Chicago Public Schools. (2009). Illinois standards achievement test over time report . Retrieved
from http://research.cps.k12.il.us/cps/accountweb/Reports/citywide.html
Chicago Public Schools. (2010). English language learners . Retrieved from http://
www.cps.edu/Schools/Pages/Englishlanguagelearners.aspx
Donovan, J.E. (2007). Really underage drinkers: The epidemiology of children’s alcohol use in
the United States. Prevention Science, 8 , 192–205.
Dunford, F.W., & Elliott, D.S. (1984). Identifying career offenders using self-reported data.
Journal of Research in Crime and Delinquency, 21 , 57–86.
Farrell, A.D., Sullivan, T.N., Esposito, L.E., Meyer, A.L., & Valois, R.F. (2005). A latent
growth curve analysis of the structure of aggression, drug use, and delinquent behaviors
and their interrelations over time in urban and rural adolescents. Journal of Research on
Adolescence, 15 , 179–204.
Feng, Z., Diehr, P., Peterson, A., & McLerran, D. (2001). Selected statistical issues in group
randomized trials. Annual Review of Public Health, 22 , 167–187.
Flay, B.R., & Allred, C.G. (2003). Long-term effects of the Positive Action program. American
Journal of Health Behavior, 27 , S6–S21.
Flay, B.R., & Allred, C.G. (2010). The Positive Action Program: Improving academics,
behavior and character by teaching comprehensive skills for successful learning and living.
In T. Lovat & R. Toomey (Eds.), International handbook on values education and student
well-being (pp. 471–501). Dirtrecht, Germany: Springer.202 K.-K. Li et al.
Flay, B.R., Allred, C.G., & Ordway, N. (2001). Effects of the Positive Action program on
achievement and discipline: Two matched-control comparisons. Prevention Science, 2 ,
71–89.
Flay, B.R., Biglan, A., Boruch, R.F., Castro, F.G., Gottfredson, D., Kellam, S., ..., Ji, P.
(2005). Standards of evidence: Criteria for efficacy, effectiveness and dissemination.Prevention Science, 6 , 151–175.
Flay, B.R., Snyder, F., & Petraitis, J. (2009). The theory of triadic influence.
In R.J. DiClemente, M.C. Kegler, & R.A. Crosby (Eds.), Emerging theories in health
promotion practice and research (2nd ed., pp. 451–510). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Fullan, M. (2001). The new meaning of educational change (3rd ed.). New York: Teachers
College Press.
Glasgow, R.E., & Emmons, K.M. (2007). How can we increase translation of
research into practice? Types of evidence needed. Annual Review of Public Health, 28 ,
413–433.
Glasgow, R.E., Lichtenstein, E., & Marcus, A.C. (2003). Why don’t we see more translation of
health promotion research to practice? Rethinking the efficacy-to-effectiveness transition.American Journal of Public Health, 93 , 1261–1267.
Glew, G.M., Fan, M.-Y., Katon, W., Rivara, F.P., & Kernic, M.A. (2005). Bullying,
psychosocial adjustment, and academic performance in elementary school. Archives of
Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, 159 , 1026–1031.
Gorman, G.D., Slavin, R.E., Cheung, A.C.K., Chamberlain, A.M., Madden, N.A., &
Chambers, B. (2007). Final reading outcomes of the national randomized field trial ofSuccess for All. American Educational Research Journal, 44 , 701–731.
Guilamo-Ramos, V., Litardo, H.A., & Jaccard, J. (2005). Prevention programs for reducing
adolescent problem behaviors: Implications of the co-occurrence of problem behaviors inadolescence. Journal of Adolescent Health, 36 , 82–86.
Hahn, R., Fuqua-Whitley, D. , Wethington, H., Lowy, J., Crosby, A., Fullilove, M., ..., Dahlberg,
L. (2007). Effectiveness of universal school-ba sed programs to prevent violent and aggressive
behavior: A systematic review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 33 , S114–S129.
Hansen, W.B., Collins, L.M., Malotte, C.K., Johnson, C.A., & Fielding, J.E. (1985). Attrition
in prevention research. Journal of Behavioral Medicine, 8 , 261–275.
Hawkins, J.D., Kosterman, R., Catalano, R.F., Hill, K.G., & Abbott, R.D. (2005). Promoting
positive adult functioning through social development intervention in childhood: Long-term effects from the Seattle Social Development Project. Archives of Pediatrics and
Adolescent Medicine, 159 , 25–31.
Hawkins, J.D., & Weis, J.G. (1985). The social development model: An integrated approach
to delinquency prevention. Journal of Primary Prevention, 6 , 73–97.
Ji, P., DuBois, D.L., Flay, B.R., & Brechling, V. (2008). ‘‘Congratulations, you have been
randomized into the control group!(?)’’: Issues to consider when recruiting schools formatched-pair randomized control trials of prevention programs. Journal of School Health,
78, 131–139.
Ji, P., Flay, B.R., DuBois, D.L., Brechling, V., Day, J., & Cantillon, D. (2006). Consent form
return rates for third-grade urban elementary students. American Journal of Health
Behavior, 30 , 467–474.
Johnston, L.D., O’Malley, P.M., Bachman, J.G., & Schulenberg, J.E. (2008). Monitoring the
future national results on adolescent drug use: Overview of key findings, 2007 . Bethesda,
MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Krug, E.G., Dahlberg, L.L., Mercy, J.A., Zwi, A.B., & Lozano, R. (2002). World report on
violence and health . Geneva: World Health Organization.
Ladd, G.W., Price, J.M., & Hart, C.H. (1990). Preschoolers’ behavioral orientations
and patterns of peer contact: Predictive of peer status? In S.R. Asher &
J.D. Coie (Eds.), Peer rejection in childhood (pp. 90–115). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.Psychology and Health 203
Long, J.S., & Freese, J. (2006). Regression models for categorical dependent variables using
Stata . College Station, TX: Stata Press.
Morales, R., & Bonilla, F. (1993). Latinos in a changing U.S. economy: Comparative
perspectives on growing inequality . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Nation, M., Crusto, C., Wandersman, A., Kumpfer, K.L., Seybolt, D., Morrissey-Kane,
E., ..., Davino, K. (2003). What works in prevention: Principles of effective prevention
programs. American Psychologist, 58 , 449–456.
Noguera, P.A. (2008). The trouble with Black boys . San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Orpinas, P., & Frankowski, R. (2001). The Aggression Scale: A self-report measure of
aggressive behavior for young adolescents. Journal of Early Adolescence, 20 , 50–67.
Payton, J., Weissberg, R.P., Durlak, J.A., Dymnicki, A.B., Taylor, R.D., Schellinger, K.B., &
Pachan, M. (2008). The positive impact of social and emotional learning for kindergarten
to eighth-grade students: Findings from three scientific reviews . Chicago, IL: Collaborative
for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning.
Rabe-Hesketh, S., & Skrondal, A. (2005). Multilevel and longitudinal modeling using Stata .
College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.
Raudenbush, S.W., Martinez, A., & Spybrook, J. (2007). Strategies for improving
precision in group-randomized experiments. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis,
29, 5–29.
Royston, P. (2004). Multiple imputation of missing values. The Stata Journal, 4 , 227–241.
Rubin, D.B. (1987). Multiple imputation for nonresponse in surveys . New York: Wiley.
Schulenberg, J.E., & Maggs, J.L. (2008). Destiny matters: Distal developmental influences
on adult alcohol use and abuse. Addiction, 103 , 1–6.
Singer, M. (1994). Aids and the health crisis of the U.S. urban poor: The perspective of critical
medical anthropology. Social Science and Medicine, 39 , 931–948.
Slough, N.M., & McMahon, R.J. (2008). Preventing serious conduct problems in school-age
youth: The Fast Track program. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 15 , 3–17.
Snijders, T.A.B., & Bosker, R.J. (1999). Multilevel analysis: An introduction to basic and
advanced multilevel modeling . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Social and Character Development Research Consortium (2010). Efficacy of schoolwide
programs to promote social and character development and reduce problem behavior in
elementary school children: Social and character development multi-program evaluationreport . Washington, DC: Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Education
Research, US Department of Education.
StataCorp. (2007). Stata statistical software: Release 10 . College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.
Tang, J., & Sable, J. (2009). Characteristics of the 100 largest public elementary and secondary
school districts in the United States: 2006–07 (NCES 2009-342). Washington, DC:
National Center for Education Statistics, Institute of Education Sciences, US Departmentof Education.
Thornton, T.N., Craft, C.A., Dahlberg, L.L., Lynch, B.S., & Baer, K. (2000). Best practices of
youth violence prevention: A sourcebook for community action . Atlanta, GA: Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.
Tobler, N.S., Roona, M.R., Ochshorn, P., Marshall, D.G., Streke, A.V., & Stackpole, K.M.
(2000). School-based adolescent drug prevention programs: 1998 meta-analysis. The
Journal of Primary Prevention, 20 , 275–336.
US Department of Health and Human Services. (2008). YRBSS: Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance System . Retrieved from http://www.cdc.gov/HealthyYouth/yrbs/
von Hippel, P.T. (2007). Regression with missing Ys: An improved strategy for analyzing
multiply imputed data. Sociological Methodology, 37 , 83–117.
Wilson, S.J., & Lipsey, M.W. (2007). School-based interventions for aggressive and disruptive
behavior: Update of a meta-analysis. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 33 ,
S130–S143.204 K.-K. Li et al.
