RESEARCH Open Access
I-RREACH: an engagement and assessment tool
for improving implementation readiness of
researchers, organizations and communities in
complex interventions
Marion Maar1*, Karen Yeates2, Marcia Barron3, Diane Hua4, Peter Liu5, Margaret Moy Lum-Kwong6, Nancy Perkins4,
Jessica Sleeth2, Joshua Tobe7, Mary Jo Wabano8, Pamela Williamson9and Sheldon W Tobe1,4
Abstract
Background: Non-communicable chronic diseases are the leading causes of mortality globally, and nearly 80% of
these deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries (LM ICs). In high-income countries (HICs), inequitable
distribution of resources affects poorer and otherwis e disadvantaged groups inclu ding Aboriginal peoples.
Cardiovascular mortality in high-income countries has recently begun to fall; however, these improvements are not
realized among citizens in LMICs or those subgroups in high-income countries who are disadvantaged in the social
determinants of health including Aboriginal people. It is critical to develop multi-faceted, affordable and realistic
health interventions in collaboration with groups who experience health inequalities. Based on community-based
participatory research (CBPR), we aimed to develop implementation tools to guide complex interventions to ensure
that health gains can be realized in low-resource environments.
Methods: We developed the I-RREACH (Intervention and Res earch Readiness Engage ment and Assessment of
Community Health Care) tool to guide im plementation of interventions in low -resource environm ents. We employed
CBPR and a consensus methodology to (1) develop the theoretical basis of the tool and (2) to identify key implementation
factor domains; then, we (3) collected participant eval uation data to validate the tool during implementation.
Results: The I-RREACH tool was successfully developed using a community-based consensu s method and is rooted in
participatory principles, equalizing the importance of the k nowledge and perspectives of researchers and community
stakeholders while encouraging respectful dialogue. The I-RR EACH tool consists of three phases: fact finding, stakeholder
dialogue and community member/patient dialogue. The evaluation for our first implementation of I-RREACH by
participants was overwhelmingly positive, with 95% or more of participants indicating comfort with and support
for the process and the dialogue it creates.
Conclusions: The I-RREACH tool was designed to (1) pinpoint key domains required for dialogue between the
community and the research team to facilitate implementatio n of complex health interventions and research projects
and (2) to identify existing strengths and areas requiring further development for effective implementation. I-RREACH has
been found to be easily adaptable to diverse geographical and cultural settings and can be further adapted to other
complex interventions. Further research should include the potential use of the I-RREACH tool in the development of
blue prints for scale-up of successful interventions, particularly in low-resource environments.
Keywords: Complex intervention, Community-based participatory research, Methodology, RCT, Implementation tool,
International health, Aboriginal health, LMIC, Canada, Tanzania
* Correspondence: mmaar@nosm.ca
1Faculty of Medicine, Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Laurentian
University, Sudbury, ON, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2015 Maar et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 
DOI 10.1186/s13012-015-0257-6
Background
Non-communicable chronic diseases such as cardiovas-
cular disease (CVD), cancers, diabetes and chronic lung
diseases are the leading causes of mortality globally, ac-
counting for approximately two thirds of annual deaths.
Nearly 80% of these deaths occur in low- and middle-
income countries (LMIC) [1]. In high-income countries
(HIC), inequitable distributions of resources affect
poorer and otherwise disadvantaged groups including
Aboriginal peoples [2,3]. Furthermore, LMICs are faced
with large competing burdens of communicable diseases
and fragmented, poorly-resourced health care systems
that result in significant challenges in managing the
complexities of multiple risk factors that attribute to
chronic non-communicable diseases.
Among chronic diseases, cardiovascular disease is the
number one cause of mortality worldwide. However, car-
diovascular mortality in high-income countries has
recently begun to fall which can be attributed to both
advances in treatment as well as control of risk factors
using evidence-based management models [4,5]. Making
these advances accessible to all should be a priority glo-
bally. While HICs are effectively reducing cardiovascular
mortality [6], the gains are not realized among citizens
in LMICs nor in those subgroups in HICs who are dis-
advantaged in the social determinants of health (SDOH)
such as Aboriginal people [1]. As chronic diseases such
as hypertension and diabetes continue to rise in LMICs
and Aboriginal populations in Canada, it is critical to
develop multi-faceted, affordable and realistic health in-
terventions informed by an understanding of local
SDOH in order to ameliorate them and improve health
equity [1,7].
Barriers to CVD and hypertension treatment in LMICs and
Aboriginal communities
The availability of clinical practice guidelines for cardio-
vascular disease is necessary but not sufficient alone to
bring about significant improvements in cardiovascular
health. Risk factor reduction is complex and requires
lifestyle modifications, behaviour changes and pharma-
cologic therapy. Health care policies may actually con-
tribute additional barriers to evidence-based care and
changes to health systems, and these policies may be
required to improve the prevention and management of
chronic diseases [8].
Facing the mounting burden of CVD and related com-
plications, LMICs and Aboriginal populations often lack
the financial means and/or geographically accessible ser-
vices for diagnosis, treatment and management options,
leading to increased rates of morbidity and mortality [1].
In Canada for example, studies show that death rates
from circulatory system diseases among Aboriginal people
are significantly elevated compared with non-Aboriginalpeople [9]. Hypertension, one of the major risk factors for
CVD, is highly prevalent and has no noticeable symptoms;
therefore, it is too often undiagnosed and goes untreated in
low-resource and low access health care environments
where the focus is on other more urgent or competing
medical problems. A recent systematic review in Canadian
Aboriginal communities found an average prevalence for
hypertension of 23.5% [10]. High rates of undiagnosed
hypertension [11] were also linked to elevated rates of
chronic kidney disease [12]. Barriers to care include lower
access to renal dialysis and transplantation [13].
Although geographically and culturally quite dissimilar
to Canadian Aboriginal populations, resource-poor
African countries such as Tanzania struggle with similar
predicaments. While there are no national data sets on
the rates of hypertension, current evidence points to
higher hypertension prevalence with dramatically lower
treatment and control rates [14] associated with higher
stroke rates [15]. Compared to rural and remote
Canadian communities, the lower access to hypertension
management in Tanzania is due, in large part, to financial
resource constraints limiting numbers of adequately
trained health care providers, diagnosis and treatment as
well as a lack of infrastructure connecting patients, their
medical records and their health care providers [16].
DREAM-GLOBAL: a community-based hypertension
intervention for LMIC and Aboriginal communities
DREAM-GLOBAL (Diagnosing hypeRtension-Engaging
Action and Management in Getting LOwer Bp in
Aboriginal and LMIC) is a research project designed
to increase our knowledge of how to develop and
implement affordable, evidence-based, guidelines-driven
hypertension management interventions at the patient,
provider and community level in LMICs (Tanzania) and
Aboriginal communities in Canada by leveraging in-
novative technologies, health services and research
methodology. The project is informed by the Canadian
Hypertension Education Program (CHEP) clinical prac-
tice guidelines drawing on evidence for high blood pres-
sure prevention through dietary sodium restriction,
blood pressure measurement, education interventions for
health care providers and patients, inter-professional
care, health systems and community-based interventions
including automated reminder systems [17,18]. It com-
bines a multilayered approach including many elements
of the chronic care management model, as well as task
shifting from health care providers (HCP) to community
health resource and community health workers. The pro-
ject also facilitates self-management support, decision
support, delivery system design, clinical information sys-
tems, while building on existing capacity in health care
organizations and community resources [19]. DREAM –
GLOBAL uses a randomized controlled trial (RCT) [20]Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 2 of 13
design to test the effectiveness of a mobile health strategy
using cell phone-based short message service (SMS) tech-
nologies to facilitate blood pressure measurements and
feedback between patient and provider through the local
existing mobile phone network. The flow diagram in
Figure 1 displays the planned progression of participants
through the trial. The study is a complex intervention
leading to changes in the behaviour of patients, providers
and local systems. It is implemented using a collaborative
community-based participatory approach.
Informing complex interventions through
community-based participatory research
The components of the DREAM-GLOBAL intervention
are evidence-based, but we recognize that interventions
can easily fall short of achieving the intended outcomes
due to ineffective implementation and delivery in their
‘real life ’application within the health care system. In
particular, low-resource environments are strongly af-
fected by implementation issues. This phenomenon,
known as the implementation gap, is linked to the lack
of understanding of the multifarious factors that may
impact on the effectiveness of an intervention when im-
plemented at the community or population level [21].Confounding factors include the uniqueness of local
power structures, health systems, community organizations
and human actors making standardization unrealistic.
There is an increasing acknowledgement that to meas-
ure the degree of effectiveness of an intervention in real
clinical practice, an RCT must be pragmatic, maximizing
external validity (generalizability) while trying to pre-
serve internal validity (reliability and accuracy) [22]. A
traditional RCT design does not offer an analysis of the
multiple factors that impact on outcomes nor how or
why the observed impact occurred [23]. Leykum and
colleagues argue that this leads to a profound dilemma:
“How do we design interventional trials that are
generalizable, but also have enough flexibility to be
meaningful and more likely to be successful locally? ”
[24] Research leading to a better understanding of key
implementation factors and the mechanism by which
these influence outcomes are needed to guide imple-
mentation strategies for intervention trials as well as
proven interventions in diverse environments.
Given the rising rates of CVD in disadvantaged popu-
lations, it is essential to study the implementation factors
of CVD interventions in low-resource environments
where they are urgently needed rather than extrapolating
Figure 1 DREAM-GLOBAL consort diagram.Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 3 of 13
from high-income settings [21] The DREAM-GLOBAL
intervention trial is planned for diverse communities in
Tanzania and Aboriginal communities in Canada, and
we therefore explored these key implementation issues
through participatory research prior to rolling out the
study. Our objective was to use the information gathered
to develop an implementation tool to guide the process
of identifying key implementation issues related to
people, community, health systems, culture and relation-
ships that are likely to differ between settings. As each
of these factors introduces complexity, our goal was to
design the implementation tool to be easily adaptable to
various health care environments and health issues in a
variety of communities globally.
Using community-based participatory research (CBPR),
we aimed to develop a tool to guide dialogue between re-
searchers and communities on key aspects of researcher,
community, system functionality and readiness. We report
on (1) the theoretical underpinnings of this tool, (2) the
key domains of complexity and issues and how these are
uncovered by this tool, and (3) the evaluation feedback
from stakeholders during the testing of the tool.
Methodology
Our methodology for the development of the tool con-
sisted of a three-pronged CBPR approach: We employed
a consensus method to (1) develop the theoretical basis
of the tool and (2) to identify key implementation factor
domains; then, (3) we evaluated the tool.
A community-based participatory research approach
CBPR is not a research methodology but rather a value-
based approach to inquiry. It has been defined as “a col-
laborative research approach that is designed to ensure
and establish structures for participation by communi-
ties affected by the issue being studied, representatives
of organizations, and researchers in all aspects of the re-
search process to improve health and well-being through
taking action, including social change ”[25]. Israel and
colleagues articulate several key principles that define
CBPR. These principles include notions such as recog-
nizing the community as a unit of identity, building on
community strengths, collaboration in all phases of
the research, integration of research and action based
on co-learning and knowledge sharing to address in-
equalities [26].
Translational and intervention research in low-
resource environments frequently has a distinct cross-
cultural aspect, with much of the scientific evidence
provided by cultural outsiders. Rivkin and co-workers
argue that this can pose challenges for intervention sci-
ence as health concepts used in scientific research may
not translate or have different meanings in culturally
diverse partner communities [27]. Trickett and othershave further elaborated that “culture pervades all aspects
of community interventions ”and community collabor-
ation are fundamental to the success of complex inter-
ventions [28]. Warry noted that collaborative research in
these settings requires researchers to relinquish control
over the research process in order to strengthen their
explanations [29].
In this study, the CBPR approach formally began when
community stakeholders interested in exploring the
implementation of DREAM-GLOBAL were invited to
share their perspective on the development of an imple-
mentation tool based on their lived experience within
partner communities using a consensus method.
Indigenous consensus method approach to the
development of the theoretical basis and domains of the
implementation tool
A consensus method informed by Indigenous values [30]
and CBPR principles was used to initiate a dialogue
involving academic researchers and community stake-
holders addressing potential implementation issues for
DREAM-GLOBAL. Community stakeholders consisted
of people with lived experience and close connections in
the targeted partner communities. They included health
care workers and administrators, community-based re-
searchers, health champions and those who were or had
family affected by hypertension.
The Indigenous consensus method that we employed
differs from traditional academic consensus methods
such as the Delphi method [31] as it does not privilege
the perspective of academic experts. Instead, the
process invites cultural va lues and knowledge gained
from the lived experience of participants, by eliciting
the perspectives of those wh o are eventually affected
by the intervention such as community members and
local communities of practice. The consensus process
is completed once the nexus between community,
academic and practice-based knowledge manifests,
which in this case was achie ved after three consensus
cycles (see Table 1).
First consensus cycle
Based on the academic research team ’s past experience
(i.e. their practice-based knowledge) in implementing
interventions in a wide range of community settings, an
initial set of key factors that were reasoned to impact
implementation was created in order to provide dis-
cussion materials for the first meeting with community
collaborators. These factors included the following:
(1) community engagement; (2) local health care delivery
system; (3) patient self- management; (4) health policy;
(5) available infrastructure, including information and
communication technology; and (6) historical, social and
cultural issues. These domains were then refined andMaar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 4 of 13
theoretically contextualized within the literature on com-
munity readiness assessment [32-34] to develop the first
list of draft domains and proposed approach to assessing
readiness.
The first consensus cycle to elicit community feedback
on the draft domains and research approach was then
initiated. In Canada, it took the form of a workshop
meeting involving a group of invited stakeholders from
Aboriginal communities interested in exploring the im-
plementation of the project in their community in dia-
logue with Aboriginal health and clinical researchers. In
Tanzania, the workshop included community members,
local community researchers and academic researchers.
The dialogue was a rich exchange of lived and technical
experience in both the Canadian and Tanzanian envi-
ronments. Participants provided feedback on imple-
mentation factors and the conceptual framework of
implementation readiness a ssessment. Aboriginal and
Tanzanian stakeholders provided significant direction
for revisions to the theoretical orientation of the frame-
work and commented on the relative importance of the
draft domains.
Second consensus cycle
The second loop was designed to validate key implemen-
tation issues and a revised theoretical framework (based
on feedback from the first cycle) through member
checking with additional stakeholders during various
community meetings at sites in Canada and Tanzania.
The researchers gathered detailed feedback on the re-
vised tool, its implementation, as well as culturally com-
petent phrasing of questions and probes.
Third consensus cycle
The third feedback loop was designed to gain a final
member check on the key issues, domains, questions,
probes and implementation process of the tool. The
focus in this round was to include members of the
community health care staff in Canada and Tanzania.
This cycle provided only minor feedback on phrasing.However, the name of the implementation tool was de-
veloped during this final round.
Participant feedback on the I-RREACH tool
The finalized I-RREACH (Intervention and Research
Readiness Engagement and Assessment of Community
Health Care) tool is an implementation tool that in-
cludes a community fact sheet, an interview, and focus
group guide designed to elicit information on key factors
that may impact the implementation of the intervention.
It was implemented during visits to participating com-
munities in Canada and Tanzania. At the end of each
interview and focus group, participants were asked to
complete a short anonymous evaluation form rating
their immediate experience with the I-RREACH process.
The evaluation tool was designed to gather information
on a five-point scale on how participants perceived the
following: (1) the clarity of questions, (2) rapport and
understanding between re searcher and themselves,
(3) improvements in understanding of the interven-
tion and implementation issues, (4) cultural safety,
(5) I-RREACH process as a facilitation tool for know-
ledge exchange for implementation of the intervention
and (6) any comments or additional suggestions for
improvements. The evaluation form is provided in
Table 2. It is scaled to indicate high levels of satisfac-
tion when participants either “agree ”or “strongly
agree ”with the provided statements. It can be easily
adapted to I-RREACH evaluations by researchers who
wish to use this tool in the future. To summarize the
data, we tallied up scores for each of the five scored
domains and thematically summarized the short re-
sponses and suggestions for improvements. While any
dissatisfaction is reason for concern that researchers
may need to explore, we deemed the I-RREACH tool
to be acceptable from the participants ’perspective if
at least 85% of scores were in the combined “agree ”
and “strongly agree ”categories and no major concerns
were raised in the open-ended question component of
the questionnaire.Table 1 Participatory consensus cycles employed in the development of I-RREACH
Consensus cycle Canada Tanzania Theoretical frameworks tested Theoretical perspectives
identified as relevant
Cycle 1: discussion
of draft conceptsJuly 2012, DREAM-GLOBAL
annual meeting; facilitated
stakeholder discussionMarch 2013, group of
16 community-based
researchersResearchers ’practice-based
knowledge, Community
Readiness AssessmentCBPR, Indigenous approaches
to research, empowerment
approaches
Cycle 2: Discussions with key
stakeholders during
community-based
engagement visitsNovember 2013, group
of 11 community-based
researchersCBPR, Indigenous approaches
to research, empowerment
approachesCBPR, Indigenous approaches
to research, empowerment
approaches, practice-based
knowledge
Cycle 3 Invitation to Aboriginal
community health staff
for written feedback on
draft toolNovember 2013, key
informant community
researchersCommunity-based collaborators ’
practice-based knowledge.None identified, consensus
on applicable theoretic
frameworks was achieved at
the end of cycle 3Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 5 of 13
Ethics review
In line with the community-based participatory nature
of the development of the I-RREACH tool, the study
protocol was submitted for academic ethics review and
community-based REB review (in Canada). Members of
the research team also sought formal approval by deci-
sion makers in each of the participating communities
after local, in-person presentations. Academic and
governmental ethics approv als include the following:
The National Institute for Medical Research in Dar es
Salaam, Tanzania (approved March 19, 2014); Queen ’s
University Health Scienc es and Affiliated Teaching
Hospitals Research Ethics Board, Kingston, Ontario
(DMED-1603-13 approved June 21, 2013); and Sunnybrook
Health Sciences Centre Research Ethics Board, Toronto,
Ontario, (#182-2013, approved May 31, 2013). Community-
based ethics review in Aboriginal communities included
The Cree Board of Health and Social Services of James Bay,
Ontario (approved September 11, 2013) and Manitoulin
Anishinaabek Research Re view Committee (MARRC)
Ontario (approved October 7, 2013). The study was
also formally approved by decision making bodies in
all participating communities through Village Councils
approvals in Tanzania and Band Councils Resolutions in
First Nations in Canada.
Results
In this section, we present (1) the theoretical basis of the
I-RREACH tool and its implementation; (2) the three
components of I-RREACH, its information domains aswell as the finalized version of the I-RREACH tool tai-
lored to DREAM-GLOBAL; and (3) participant evalua-
tions of I-RREACH during implementation.
Resolving theoretical dissonance through consensus cycles
Results of the first consensus cycle
The Community Readiness Assessment (CRA) approach
was first explored by the academic researchers as a lens
to guide the development of the implementation tool.
CRAs presuppose that the locus of change is solidly an-
chored within the community, with researchers assessing
how much the community has “to be moved though
stages of change ”based on the transtheoretical model of
change [33]. Further, the CRA emphasizes a predomin-
antly quantitative approach that leads to ranking of com-
munities (based on scores from ratings scales) with
respect to their research readiness measured by parame-
ters designated by the researchers. During the first con-
sensus cycle however, stakeholders strongly advocated
for a need to incorporate a community empowering
CBPR approach as well as respect and understanding for
Indigenous and community research values into the de-
sign of the implementation tool. CRA was seen as dis-
sonant with the aspirations of community stakeholders,
because it ignores potential capacity gaps and changes
required in the academic research team, health systems
and policies that may be essential to make an interven-
tion work in a given community. Community stake-
holders therefore strongly rejected the CRA approach
for DREAM-GLOBAL, as they perceived it and its useTable 2 Participant evaluation form for the I-RREACH tool
DREAM-GLOBAL: Intervention and Research Readiness Engagement and Assessment of Community Health Care (I-RREACH) feedback form
for participants
Your feedback would be appreciated regarding the focus group/interview sessions for the I-RREACH project of the DREAM-GLOBAL Study.
This feedback is very important for future planning and use of this tool and process in other communities. We would appreciate you
taking the time to complete this evaluation form and returning it at the end of the meeting.
Content evaluation (check one only)
Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
1. The questions asked were clear and made sense to me.
2. I think the researcher understood my perspective (two-way exchange
of information).
3. After attending this focus group/interview, I have a better understanding
of the DREAM-GLOBAL project goals and how it can be implemented.
Cultural safety evaluation (check one only)
4. I felt comfortable with what we discussed during the focus group/interview.
Please Explain:
5. The focus group/interview was a good way to exchange information and
ideas related to the project.
Please Explain:
6. What did you like best about the session?
7. Is there anything you think we should change?Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 6 of 13
of rankings as unrealistic and paternalistic. While it is
important as it has been argued in the CRA approach
that communities pull together in the development of
interventions [35], our CBPR showed that this is just
one of many key issues that relates to effective imple-
mentation. Our new understandings of the multiple fac-
tors that may impact on implementation in communities
in low-resource environments were incorporated into
our implementation tool.
Another theme which emerged during the first con-
sensus cycle was that Aboriginal and Tanzanian research
participants preferred to move away from disempower-
ing outsider-based assessments of communities centered
on what outside experts deemed as important towards a
dialogue and knowledge exchange to co-create a shared
understanding of implementation issues in Aboriginal
and Tanzanian communities.
Results of the second and third consensus cycles
Based on community feedback in the first consensus
cycle, a new goal was articulated to develop a qualitative
implementation tool with the following characteristics:
(1) to employ the principles of CBPR and affirming
practice-based knowledge and Indigenous lived experi-
ence; (2) to enhance bidirectional learning between re-
searcher and community stakeholders as well as their
collective understandings of the individual, social and
organizational determinants that may affect the inter-
vention; (3) to identify existing strengths and empower-
ing approaches that may support implementation; as
well as (4) to recognize areas where additional assistance
may be required by researchers, communities and sys-
tems to enable effective implementation.
The consensus dialogue provided the impetus for a
substantial theoretical shift of the tool from its first iter-
ation as a researcher-driven, unidirectional assessment
of community capacity to its final version as a collabora-
tive, knowledge exchange and dialogue tool. As a result,
alternative theoretical models had to be explored as the
basis for the implementation tool and newly adjusted
theoretical underpinnings incorporated into the tool
were shared during the second feedback loop (see
Table 1). The relevance of the CBPR and affirmation of
collaboration in all aspects of implementation, as well as
the need for capacity building with communities and
academic researchers was confirmed. Minor adjustments
were made and specific questions in each domain were
developed for different audiences in the community.
An interview guide for health care providers was de-
veloped with a complementary focus group tool for
community members as wel l as a fact-finding sheet
designed to gather community specific information
and contacts. The name of the tool was then changed
from a ‘Community Readiness Assessment Tool ’to theIntervention and Research Readiness, Engagement and
Assessment of Community Health Care Tool (I-RREACH)
to reflect the commitment to a participatory approach and
bidirectional knowledge exchange.
Components and information domains of the finalized
I-RREACH tool
The information gathering and dialogue tool we devel-
oped consists of three stages: (1) a community profile
section with a fact table which can be populated through
various fact-finding activities, (2) an interview guide to
help facilitate the discussion and understanding of stra-
tegic topics with key stakeholders in the community and
( 3 )af o c u sg r o u pg u i d et ol e a dad i a l o g u eo nc o m m u n i t y -
centered issues.
I-RREACH phase 1: community profile (fact table)
This section of the I-RREACH tool is designed to be
employed at the start of the engagement phase. This sec-
tion gathers relevant community profile information to
determine if a specific community has the basic charac-
teristics that would enable implementation of the
intervention. Information gathering is focused on the
community, relevant governance, health care staff, struc-
ture and programs, infrastructure and technology as well
as resources. This data may be found in publically avail-
able records and during initial contacts with the com-
munity. When this part of the I-RREACH tool is used, it
may not be clear yet if the implementation will occur, ei-
ther because the community has not yet fully affirmed
interest or because certain characteristics identified in
the community profile may exclude the community from
participation. For example, in the DREAM-GLOBAL
study, cell phones are used to send educational SMS text
messages to patients and lack of cell phone coverage
would therefore disqualify a community from participa-
tion. Other studies may require specific health care cap-
acities or community demographics, all of which would
be identified during this early data collection phase.
I-RREACH phase 2: key informant perspective
(interview guide)
During this phase of I-RREACH, a dialogue with key
stakeholders is established. We learned that key stake-
holders should be identified early on in collaboration
with the local contacts. Key stakeholders generally are
individuals who could have a negative or positive effect
on the implementation of the intervention. Many of
these key stakeholders may be affected by the interven-
tion through training, changes in practice or additional
responsibilities. Others may be decision makers, health
champions or people personally affected by the health
issue or they may wield influence in the community.
The discussion sessions with key stakeholders in thisMaar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 7 of 13
phase builds on the information gathered in the com-
munity profile but elicits the more practical and
community-specific knowledge that is needed for effect-
ive implementation from an operational perspective.
The interview phase also allows stakeholders to learn
about the intervention and reflect on their expectations
and level comfort with the project. The interview do-
mains cover characteristics of local leadership, descrip-
tions of services, access and awareness of relevant
community programs, local understanding of the health
issues, resources and planning, the perceived fit be-
tween the intervention and community goals and finally
the requirements and preparedness of researchers and
community to conduct collaborative research and im-
plementation of the intervention. Interviewers should
continually probe for information that would lead them
to a higher level of understanding of the role of polit-
ics, policy and resource allocation on the health issue
in question; the cultural context and community life;
local interaction of medical traditions; oppressive hege-
monic experiences in the community with health ser-
vices or research; and community expectations related
to the research and the academic team.
I-RREACH phase 3: community members perspective
(focus group guide)
The focus group discussions with community members
cover similar issues as the topics discussed in the previ-
ous phase; however, the guide is designed to elicit the
lived experience of those who are expected to be the
main recipients of the intervention. The discussion
framework explores the qualities of community life and
history and how the health issue is culturally situated,
such as the intertwining of health and social issues as
well as expectations of community members. Providing
a safe environment to exchange information about the
intervention and inviting reflection on community mem-
bers ’expectations and level comfort with the initiative
and research team ’s readiness to work with the commu-
nity is an important requirement in this phase.
The domains of information covered in each of the
I-RREACH phases are summarized in Table 3. Using
the identified key domains, a comprehensive tool was
developed to gather information and initiate dialogue.
The complete tool adapted to the hypertension manage-
ment intervention in Aboriginal communities in Canada
and rural villages in Tanzania as part of the DREAM-
GLOBAL RCT is provided in Additional file 1. The
tool can be easily adapted to support implementation
of interventions for other health issues in various
environments.
Gathering information on key implementation domains
from different sources as suggested in the I-RREACH tool
allows for rigorous data collect ion, including identification,triangulation and member chec king of implementation is-
sues. The collected information helps implementation
teams to build on existing community strengths and antici-
pate and ameliorate barriers to program implementation.
The rich qualitative data from key informants as well as
the lived experience of community members allows re-
searchers to gain a deeper understanding of practical im-
plementation aspects and community expectations. This,
in turn, allows researchers to reduce their knowledge gaps
and respond to local needs more effectively. Further, by en-
gaging in meaningful dialogue, it is hoped that unexpected
miscommunications or errors made along the way will be
similarly communicated within the team of academic and
community members for quick resolution.
Evaluation results of the I-RREACH tool
The I-RREACH tool was implemented during commu-
nity visits in five Aboriginal Communities in Canada and
in two communities in Tanzania. A total of 135 infor-
mants participated in twelve focus groups and seven in-
terviews in Canada and Tanzania. Modest incentives
were provided for participants and included a catered
meal and small monetary compensation in recognition
of participant ’s time and incurred expenses. Translators
were present as required. An interactive education ses-
sion on hypertension tailored to the audience was of-
fered prior to the focus groups.
After their participation in I-RREACH focus group or
interview sessions, 83 participants completed an evalu-
ation of the I-RREACH session. When asked to assess
the content of the I-RREACH dialogue, most of these
participants (98.8%) agreed or strongly agreed that the
interview and focus group questions were clear, helped
the researcher to understand their perspective (90.4%)
and enhanced their understanding of the project
(95.2%). From the perspective of cultural safety, 95.2%
agreed or strongly agreed that they felt comfortable with
the I-RREACH sessions and 97.6 % agreed or strongly
agreed that the I-RREACH sessions were a good way to
exchange ideas between the research team and the com-
munity stakeholders. Table 4 provides the evaluation
tool and a summary of the relative scoring completed by
participants in this study.
Based on an analysis of the written answers to open-
ended questions in the evaluation, we also learned that
the vast majority of participants were comfortable with
what was discussed during the focus group sessions and
also why people felt this way. The most common expla-
nations provided included that they enjoyed learning
about high blood pressure and its management and they
appreciated the positive and respectful demeanor of the
presenting research team members. This underscores
the value of including engaging education activities
in community visits. Many participants stated that theMaar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 8 of 13
informal atmosphere made them feel comfortable and at
ease. Many appreciated the opportunity to share their
views and experiences of high blood pressure with
others and to listen to others ’perspectives in the friendly
and empowering atmosphere.
Most participants indicated that no changes for
I-RREACH were needed; however, based on the contentanalysis of the open-ended questions, some stressed the
importance of ongoing close contact between the re-
search team and participants, requirements for training
opportunities for staff and support for potential partici-
pants who struggle with healthy lifestyles due to difficult
economic circumstances. Their recommendations are in
line with the CBPR approach.Table 3 I-RREACH components with listing of respective information domains
Information Domain (Phase 1) (Phase 2) (Phase 3)
Community profile tool
(document and internet based)Key informant perspective
(interview guide)Community members perspective
(focus group guide)
Basic community descriptions Demographic information n/a n/a
Leadership Basic contact information Formal and informal leadership;
economic and political structuresn/a
Community programs Contact information, addresses,
organizational informationDescription of activities, quality,
cultural relevance, integration
of services, community awareness
and access; interacting medical
traditionsLived experience of the health issues
in the community, cultural context,
program quality, perspectives on
self-management, cultural perspectives;
interacting medical traditions
Local understanding of the
health issuen/a Perceived importance and
quality of local health data on
the issuePathways to access to health
information
Resources and planning Basic descriptions of funders
and initiativesImplications of funding streams
and planned initiativesn/a
Perceived fit of the intervention
with community objectivesn/a Past experiences with similar
interventions, potential
challenges and facilitatorsContext of culture and community,
challenges and facilitators; medical
traditions
Infrastructure and technology Basic descriptions Community comfort, use of
technology, barriersCommunity comfort, level of use in
the community and with different
groups
Readiness for community-based
researchn/a Quality of community experience
with research; community
expectations; competency and
learning requirements for
researchersQuality of community experience
with research; commu nity expectations;
competency and learning requirements
for researchers; experience of past
oppression
Table 4 Participant evaluation tool for I-RREACH with tallies of scores and percentages of participants choosing each score
Participant evaluation of I-RREACH
Content evaluation
Strongly disagree Disagree Neutral Agree Strongly agree
1. The questions asked were clear and made sense to me. 0 0 1 32 50
0.0% 0.0% 1.2% 38.6% 60.2%
2. I think the researcher understood my perspective. 1 2 4 38 37
1.2% 2.4% 4.8% 45.8% 44.6%
3. After attending this focus group/interview, do you have a better understanding
of the DREAM-GLOBAL project and how it can be implemented?01 3 3 9 4 0
0.0% 1.2% 3.6% 47.0% 48.2%
Cultural safety evaluation
4. I felt comfortable with what we discussed during the focus group/interview. 0 2 2 29 50
0.0% 2.4% 2.4% 34.9% 60.2%
5. The focus group/interview was a good way to exchange information and ideas
related to the project.10 1 4 3 3 8
1.2% 0.0% 1.2% 51.8% 45.8%Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 9 of 13
Discussion
A focus on exchange of practical and technical knowledge
According to Buchannan [36], the most widely shared
definitions of theory in health sciences are still based on
the positivist ideas that a theory should be testable and
generalizable. While this positivist model is adequate to
explain and predict biological aspects of health prob-
lems, the complexity of human practices and actions
and variability in the characteristics of health care set-
tings makes a natural sciences model much less appro-
priate for health care research.
Researching not only ifbut also how an intervention
has an impact on change on the other hand provides
more useful knowledge and allows weak links in the
causal chain to be strengthened during the implementa-
tion. The UK ’s Medical Research Council ’s guidelines
[37] for developing and evaluating randomized con-
trolled trials for complex interventions emphasize the
importance of understanding how and why an interven-
tion works.
“The rationale for a complex intervention, i.e. what
changes are expected, and how change is to be achieved,
may not be clear at the outset. If so, a vitally important
early task is to develop a theoretical understanding
of the likely process of change, by drawing on exist-
ing evidence and theory, supplemented if necessary
by new primary research, for example interviews with
stakeholders ”[23].
Similarly, Green argues that theory in health research
should not be considered as “offering universal explana-
tions or predictions, but rather as enhancing under-
standing of complex situations. Such understanding will
inevitably need to be sensitive to specific contextual fac-
tors, and would necessarily draw on the experience of
practitioners and communities ”[38]. The notion of
practice-based knowledge (or praxis) focuses on what we
have learned through experience on how to move from
theoretical knowledge to practice at the point of inter-
vention [39]. Aristotle is credited with advancing the
idea of praxis as knowledge which is based on experi-
ences with social and historical relationships which cor-
respond to “what we might call wisdom today ”[36].
The notions of praxis and importance of community-
held wisdom for implementation of a complex inter-
vention became important theoretical underpinnings
contributing to the development of the I-RREACH
tool, as the team drew on researcher and community
stakeholder experience to recognize the domains that
may impact on the effectiveness of interventions in
Aboriginal and Tanzanian communities. Furthermore,
community stakeholders firmly emphasized the need for
bidirectional learning, dialogue and ongoing reflection
related to project implementation, which will provide
ongoing information to the research team on how theintervention is working or why it is not. Similarly,
Leykum and colleagues have advocated for the inte-
gration of local sensibilities and ongoing reflection into
pragmatic research design [24]. Based on our experience
thus far with DREAM-GLOBAL, practical reasoning can
provide a critical lens to focus our inquiry to recognize
and respond to insights based on the unique community
and organizational context, circumstances and challenges
as well as historical and cultural dimension that may
affect the intervention.
In order to establish good working relationships, it is
essential that university and community-based collabora-
tors have an in-depth understanding of one another ’s
needs, resources and expectations related to research
and action. Jacklin and Kinoshameg have argued that in
order to be successful i n CBPR, researchers “must un-
learn the expert role they have been entrenched in ”
[40] and the I-RREACH tool can facilitate this process.
Furthermore, implementation researchers require educa-
tion not only by listening during the CBPR process but also
more formally by learning about topics such as community
history and cultural safety in research [41]. Therefore,
research teams should also learn about and critically reflect
on broader origins of ill health in their partner communi-
ties through the implementation process.
The need for critical reflection on social realities of
partner communities
In Canada, there is considerable evidence that govern-
mental assimilation policies, residential schools and
forced changes of lifestyle imposed on Aboriginal people
have resulted in much of the disease burden and health
inequities in Aboriginal communities seen today [42-44].
In the past, these forms of oppression were touted as be-
ing in the best interest of Aboriginal people. Aboriginal
perspectives were marginalized and negative outcomes
were frequently associated with change imposed by
outsiders. Given this negative impact of colonialism,
Aboriginal communities often refuse standardized solu-
tions offered or imposed by outsiders, and researchers
must be cognizant of these historic facts. However, the
consequences of a colonial legacy are often difficult
to understand for researchers and representatives of
governmental institutions, who are typically deeply
entrenched in their own worldviews. Canadian Indigenous
scholar Willie Ermine aptly observes that
“One of the festering irritants for Indigenous peoples,
in their encounter with the West, is the brick wall
of a deeply embedded belief and practice of Western
universality. Central to the issue of universality is the
dissemination of a singular world consciousness, a
monoculture with a claim to one model of humanity
and one model of society ”[45].Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 10 of 13
The community stakeholders ’insistence in this study
on focusing on a range of factors that may affect the
outcomes of interventions beyond the community ’s dir-
ect control was based on their practice-based knowledge
as well as an understanding of the hegemony that
Ermine describes. The unique influences that underlie
health care barriers and disparities in Indigenous com-
munities are complex and include key factors such as
socioeconomic status, racism, cultural and communica-
tion differences, rural location [46] as well as related lack
of resources for services and lack of incentives for pro-
viders to practice in rural areas. This perspective is also
supported outside of the Indigenous health literature.
For example, the notion that an intervention is af-
fected by many factors beyond the control of the
community is described by Tee and colleagues. They
argue that even a strongly supported intervention
within a health system can be seriously affected by
“political, financial, educational, cultural, logistic, an-
thropological, and emotional ”barriers [47]. Trickett
and co-workers emphasize the importance of influence of
culture, the state, policies and ideologies on community
interventions [28].
The situation in communities in low-income countries
is similar as shown in a recent systematic review indicat-
ing that health equity initiatives face potential barriers
from a host of challenges in LMICs, including potential
resistance from influential actors whose interests or
values could be challenged by the intervention and social
processes that exclude special interest groups such as
rural communities from decision making or intended
benefits of the intervention [48]. The review indicates
that “politics, process and power must be integrated into
the study of health policies and the practice of health
system development ”. Conversely, research in South
Africa shows the positive impact of meaningfully involv-
ing local people including Community Health Workers
(CHW) in community-based initiatives designed to
develop interventions for hypertension [49].
Finally, our evaluation data supports the theoretical
framework and provides preliminary support for the
validity of the I-RREACH tool as an appropriate imple-
mentation tool from the perspective of community
stakeholders. The evaluation data also provided import-
ant feedback to the research team on the effectiveness of
their approach and their own increasing level of cultural
competence and safety. We therefore recommend that
the evaluation form be used whenever the I-RREACH
tool or an adapted version of it is used. Participants
should be provided with several minutes to fill out the
form (see Table 2) anonymously and to return forms in
blank envelopes in order to reduce the social desirability
bias. If participants ’literacy is not sufficient to fill out
the form, community helpers are needed to help fill outthe forms based on the verbal feedback of each partici-
pant (as our team did in Tanzania).
Limitations
The I-RREACH tool has been successfully used to sup-
port the implementation of the DREAM-GLOBAL prag-
matic RCT and the related health services changes with
formal positive feedback from participants as described
in this paper. The DREAM-GLOBAL study is still in its
implementation phase, and comprehensive data on re-
cruitment and retention of participating communities,
providers and patients is not yet available. Additional
time and research is required (1) to conduct a detailed
process evaluation to inform best practices for the
implementation of the tool; (2) to document how the
I-RREACH tool and process enabled understanding
of implementation issues that can foster effective relation-
ships between researchers and community stakeholders
throughout the span of a project ; and (3) to analyse the
specific collaborative, CBPR and inter-professional skills
required of the research team members to successfully im-
plement I-RREACH.
Conclusion
The I-RREACH tool was designed to (1) pinpoint key
domains required for dialogue between the community
and the research team to facilitate implementation of
complex health interventions and research projects and
(2) to identify existing strengths and areas requiring further
development for effective implementation. I-RREACH has
been found to be easily adaptable to diverse geographical
and cultural settings and can be further adapted to other
complex interventions. Further research should include the
potential use of the I-RREACH tool in the development of
blue prints for scale up of successful interventions, particu-
larly in low-resource environments. Methodological re-
search is also needed on the ongoing requirements for
sustainable community engagement in the implementation
of interventions, the CBPR skills and other training re-
quired of the academic team as well as the role of ongoing
mindful reflection as a method of inquiry in implementa-
tion research when the I-RREACH approach is applied to
implementation research.
Additional file
Additional file 1: I-RREACH TOOL: Intervention and Research
Readiness Engagement and Assessment of Community Health Care.
A tool for improving implementation readiness of researchers, organizations
and communities in a complex interventions of hypertension management
in the First Nations, Inuit and LMIC home care.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 11 of 13
Authors ’contributions
MM drafted the paper in collaboration with ST and KY. MM and MB drafted
the evaluation tool as well as updates of the I-RREACH tool after each of the
consultation cycles in collaboration with ST and KY. All authors contributed
to the design of the project, critically reviewed early drafts and approved the
final version of the paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank health care staff and leadership of both
countries for their contributions to this participatory study. In Canada, these
include the following: Aundeck Omni Kaning First Nation, Cree Nation of
Chisasibi, Eel River Bar First Nation, M ’Chigeeng First Nation, Noojmowin Teg
Health Centre, Sheshegwaning First Nation, and Wikwemikong Unceded
Indian Reserve. In Tanzania, they include Kisiki and Lambo villages in the Hai
district. The project is funded by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
Grand Challenges Canada and the Global Alliance for Chronic Diseases. We
thank Lisa Boesch for helping with the preparation of the manuscript. We
thank Drs. Alison Hamilton, Bev Holmes and Alison Hutchinson for their
insightful and constructive review and comments on our draft manuscript.
Author details
1Faculty of Medicine, Northern Ontario School of Medicine, Laurentian
University, Sudbury, ON, Canada.2Department of Medicine, Queens
University, Kingston, ON, Canada.3Riverstone Research Consulting, Guelph,
ON, Canada.4Department of Nephrology, Sunnybrook Health Sciences
Centre, Sunnybrook Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.5University of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
6Department of Research, Advocacy and Health Promotion, Heart and Stroke
Foundation of Ontario, Toronto, ON, Canada.7Department of Medicine,
Western University, London, ON, Canada.8Wikwemikong Health Centre,
Wikwemikong, ON, Canada.9Noojmowin Teg Health Centre, Little Current,
ON, Canada.
Received: 23 September 2014 Accepted: 24 April 2015
References
1. World Health Organization. Global status report on noncommunicable
diseases 2010. Geneva; 2011. [http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2011/
9789240686458_eng.pdf?ua=1]
2. Tjepkema M. The health of the off-reserve aboriginal population. Health
Rep. 2002;13(Suppl):1 –17 [http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/82-003-s/2002001/
pdf/82-003-s2002004-eng.pdf].
3. Dinca-Panaitescu M, Dinca-Panaitescu S, Raphael D, Bryant T, Pilkington B,
Daiski I. The dynamics of the relationship between diabetes incidence and
low income: longitudinal results from Canada ’s National Population Health
Survey. Maturitas. 2012;72(3):229 –35.
4. Wijeysundera HC, Machado M, Farahati F, Wang X, Witteman W, van der
Velde G, et al. Association of temporal trends in risk factors and treatment
uptake with coronary heart disease mortality, 1994-2005. JAMA.
2010;303:1841 –7.
5. McAlister FA, Wilkins K, Joffres M, Leenen FH, Fodor G, Gee M, et al.
Changes in the rates of awareness, treatment and control of hypertension
in Canada over the past two decades. CMAJ. 2011;183:1007 –13.
6. Mathers CD, Loncar D. Projections of global mortality and burden of disease
from 2002 to 2030. PLoS Med. 2006;3(11), e442.
7. King M. Chronic diseases and mortality in Canadian Aboriginal peoples:
learning from the knowledge. Chronic Dis Can. 2010;31(1):2 –3.
8. Tobe SW, Stone JA, Brouwers M, Bhattacharyya O, Walker KM, Dawes M,
et al. Harmonization of guidelines for the prevention and treatment of
cardiovascular disease: the C-CHANGE Initiative. CMAJ. 2011;183(15):e1135 –50.
9. Tjepkema M, Wilkins R, Senécal S, Guimond E, Penney C. Mortality of urban
Aboriginal adults in Canada, 1991 –2001. Chronic Dis Can. 2010;31(1):4 –21.
10. Foulds HJA, Warburton DER. The blood pressure and hypertension
experience among North American Indigenous populations. J Hypertens.
2014;32(4):724 –34.
11. Bruce SG, Riediger ND, Zacharias JM, Young TK. Obesity and obesity-related
comorbidities in a Canadian First Nation population. Prev Chronic Dis.
2011;8(1):a03.
12. Yeates K, Tonelli M. Chronic kidney disease among Aboriginal people living
in Canada. Clin Nephrol. 2010;74 Suppl 1:S57 –60.13. Yeates K. Health disparities in renal disease in Canada. Semin Nephrol.
2010;30(1):12 –8.
14. Edwards R, Unwin N, Mugusi F, Whiting D, Rashid S, Kissima J, et al.
Hypertension prevalence and care in an urban and rural area of Tanzania.
J Hypertens. 2000;18(2):145 –52.
15. Walker R, Whiting D, Unwin N, Mugusi F, Swai M, Aris E, et al. Stroke
incidence in rural and urban Tanzania: a prospective, community-based
study. Lancet Neurol. 2010;9(8):786 –92.
16. Kilonzo KG, Ghosh S, Temu SA, Maro V, Callegari J, Carter M, et al. Outcome
of acute peritoneal dialysis in northern Tanzania. Perit Dial Int.
2012;32(3):261 –6.
17. Tobe SW, Touyz RM, Campbell NR. The Canadian hypertension education
program - a unique Canadian knowledge translation program. Can J Cardiol.
2007;23(7):551 –5.
18. Glynn LG, Murphy AW, Smith SM, Schroeder K, Fahey T. Interventions used
to improve control of blood pressure in patients with hypertension.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2010;3, CD005182.
1 9 . C o l e m a nK ,A u s t i nB T ,B r a c hC ,W a g n e rE H .E v i d e n c eo nt h e
chronic care model in the new millennium. Health Aff (Millwood).
2009;28(1):75 –85.
20. Tobe SW, Yeates KE, Campbell NR, Liu P. Detecting and treating high blood
pressure in Aboriginal population and low and middle income countries
(DREAM-GLOBAL). ClinicalTrials.gov registration: NCT02111226. 2014
21. Haines A, Kuruvilla S, Borchert M. Bridging the implementation gap
between knowledge and action for health. Bull World Health Organ.
2004;82(10):724 –31.
22. Godwin M, Ruhland L, Casson I, MacDonald S, Delva D, Birtwhistle R, et al.
Pragmatic controlled clinical trials in primary care: the struggle between
external and internal validity. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2003;3:28.
23. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M.
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: new guidance.
Medical Research Council. [http://www.mrc.ac.uk/documents/pdf/
complex-interventions-guidance/]
24. Leykum LK, Pugh JA, Lanham HJ, Harm on J, McDaniel Jr RR. Implementation
research design: integrati ng participatory action research into randomized
controlled trials. Implement Sci. 2009;4:69.
25. Viswanathan M, Ammerman A, Eng E, Gartlehner G, Lohr KN, Griffith D, et al.
Community-based participatory research: assessing the evidence. Rockville, MD:
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality; 2004. http://www.ahcpr.gov/
downloads/pub/evidence/pdf/cbpr/cbpr.pdf.
26. Israel BA, Schulz AJ, Parker EA, Becker AB. Review of community-based
research: assessing partnership approaches to improve public health. Annu
Rev Public Health. 1998;19:173 –202.
27. Rivkin I, Trimble J, Lopez EDS, Johnson S, Orr E, Allen J. Disseminating
research in rural Yup ’ik communities: challenges and ethical considerations
in moving from discovery to intervention development. Int J Circumpolar
Health. 2013;72:1 –8.
28. Trickett EJ, Beehler S, Deutsch C, Green LW, Hawe P, McLeroy K, et al.
Advancing the science of community-level interventions. Am J Public
Health. 2011;101(8):1410 –9.
29. Warry W. Doing unto others: applied anthropology, collaborative research
and Native self-determination. Culture. 1990;10(1):61 –73.
30. Maar M, Seymour A, Sanderson B, Boesch L. Reaching agreement for
an Aboriginal e-health research ag enda: the Aboriginal telehealth
knowledge circle consensus method. Rural Remote Health.
2010;10(1):1299.
31. Fink A, Kosecoff J, Chassin M, Brook RH. Consensus methods: characteristics
and guidelines for use. Am J Public Health. 1984;74(9):979 –83.
32. Kelly K, Edwards R, Comello MLG, Plested BA, Jumper-Thurman P, Slater M.
The community readiness model: a complementary approach to social
marketing. Mark Theory. 2003;3(4):411 –26.
33. Edwards RW, Jumper-Thurman P, Plested BA, Oetting ER, Swanson L.
Community readiness: research to practice. J Community Psychol.
2000;28(3):291 –307.
34. Plested BA, Edwards RW, Jumper-Thu rman P. Community readiness: a handbook
for successful change. Fort Collins: Tri-Ethnic Center for Prevention Research;
2006. http://www.nami.org/Content/NavigationMenu/NAMI_Center_for_
Excellence/Tools_for_Excellence/CommunityReadinessHandbook.pdf.
35. Plested BA, Jumper-Thurman P, Edwards RW, Oetting ER. Community
readiness: a tool for effective community-based prevention. Prevention
Researcher. 1998;5(2):5 –7.Maar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 12 of 13
36. Buchanan DR. Reflections on the relationship between theory and practice.
Health Educ Res. 1994;9(3):273 –83.
37. Craig P, Dieppe P, Macintyre S, Michie S, Nazareth I, Petticrew M.
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: the new Medical
Research Council guidance. BMJ. 2008;337:a1655.
38. Green J. The role of theory in evidence-based health promotion practice.
Health Educ Res. 2000;15(2):125 –9.
39. Warry W. The eleventh thesis: applied anthropology as praxis. Hum Organ.
1992;51(2):155 –63.
40. Jacklin K, Kinoshameg P. Developing a participatory Aboriginal health
research project: “Only if it ’s going to mean something ”. J Empir Res Hum
Res Ethics. 2008;3(2):53 –67.
41. Maar MA, Lightfoot NE, Sutherland ME, Strasser RP, Wilson KJ, Lidstone-
Jones CM, et al. Thinking outside the box: Aboriginal peoples ’suggestions
for conducting health studies with aboriginal communities. Public Health.
2011;125(11):747 –53.
42. Waldram JB, Herring DA, Young TK. Aboriginal health in Canada historical,
cultural and epidemiological perspectives. 2nd ed. Toronto: University of
Toronto Press; 2006. p. 48 –172.
43. Royal Commission on Aboriginal Peoples. Report of the Royal Commission
on Aboriginal Peoples. Ottawa: The Commission; 1996.
44. First Nations Information Governance Centre (FNIGC). First Nations Regional
Health Survey (RHS) 2008/10: national report on adults, youth and children
living in First Nations communities. Ottawa: FNIGC; 2012.
45. Ermine W. The ethical space of engagement. Indigenous Law J. 2007;6(1)
46. Marrone S. Understanding barriers to health care: a review of disparities in
health care services among indigenous populations. Int J Circumpolar
Health. 2007;66(3):188 –98.
47. Tee A, Calzavacca P, Licari E, Goldsmith D, Bellemo R. Bench-to-bedside
review: the MET syndrome –the challenges of researching and adopting
medical emergency teams. Crit Care. 2008;12(1):205.
48. Gilson L, Raphaely N. The terrain of health policy analysis in low and middle
income countries: a review of published literature 1994 –2007. Health Policy
Plan. 2008;23(5):294 –307.
49. Bradley HA, Puoane T. Prevention of hypertension and diabetes in an urban
setting in South Africa: participatory action research with community health
workers. Ethn Dis. 2007;17(1):49 –54.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitMaar et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:64 Page 13 of 13
