Implementation
ScienceMacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36
Open Access DEBATE
BioMed Central© 2010 MacLean et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative C ommons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestri cted use, distributi on, and reproductio n in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.DebateUnpacking vertical and horizontal integration: 
childhood overweight/obesity programs and 
planning, a Canadian perspective
Lynne M MacLean*1, Kathryn Clinton1, Nancy Edwards1,2, Michael Garrard3, Lisa Ashley1,2,4,5 , Patti Hansen-Ketchum6,7 
and Audrey Walsh8
Abstract
Background: Increasingly, multiple intervention programming is being understood and implemented as a key 
approach to developing public health  initiatives and strategies. Using socio-ecological and population health 
perspectives, multiple intervention programming approa ches are aimed at providing coordinated and strategic 
comprehensive programs operating over system levels and ac ross sectors, allowing practitioners and decision makers 
to take advantage of synergistic effects. These approaches also require vertical an d horizontal (v/h) integration of policy 
and practice in order to be maximally effective.
Discussion: This paper examines v/h integratio n of interventions for childhood ov erweight/obesity prevention and 
reduction from a Canadian perspective. It describes the implicatio ns of v/h integration for childhood overweight and 
obesity prevention, with examples of interventions where v/ h integration has been implemented. An application of a 
conceptual framework for structuring v/h integration of an overweight/obesity pr evention initiative is presented. The 
paper concludes with a discussion of the implications of vertic al/horizontal integration for policy, research, and 
practice related to childhood overweight and obes ity prevention multiple intervention programs.
Summary: Both v/h integration across sectors and over system leve ls are needed to fully support multiple intervention 
programs of the complexity and scope required by obesit y issues. V/h integration requ ires attention to system 
structures and processes. A conceptual framework is needed to support policy alignment, multi-level evaluation, and 
ongoing coordination of people at the front lines of prac tice. Using such tools to achieve integration may enhance 
sustainability, increase effectiveness of prevention and reduct ion efforts, decrease stigmati zation, and lead to new ways 
to relate the environment to people and people to the environment for better health for children.
Background
The importance of vertical and horizontal integration in 
childhood overweight/obesity interventions
Increasingly, multiple intervention programming has
been suggested as a key approach to developing publichealth initiatives and strategies [1,2]. Using socio-ecologi-cal and population health perspectives, multiple inter-vention program approaches endeavour to providecoordinated and strategic comprehensive programs oper-ating over system levels and across sectors, allowing prac-titioners and decision makers to take advantage ofsynergistic effects. These approaches also require vertical
and horizontal (v/h) integration of policy and practice inorder to be maximally effective. This paper examines v/hintegration of interventions for childhood overweight/obesity prevention and reduction, given the complex andmulti-level nature of obesity, including environmental,social, community, organizational, and policy system lev-els.
In the past, obesity prevention and treatment programs
have typically focused on health education and individualbehaviour change, with emphasis on personal lifestyleand responsibility. Yet, advances in socio-ecologicalthinking over the last decade point to system change asthe missing link in addressing  the obesity increase [3,4].
* Correspondence: lynne.maclean@uottawa.ca
1 Community Health Research Unit, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 2 of 11
Systemic environmental influences relate to socio-eco-
logical features of the problem and include individual,home, school, community, national, and internationalcomponents [5]. As noted in the Doak et al . [5] review of
child and adolescent obesity prevention programs, a widearray of multi-level factors have impact on the prevalenceof overweight/obesity. For example, at the school, com-munity, and national levels, environmental influences caninclude the school curriculum, transportation system,socio-economic status of aggregate populations, commu-nity recreation opportunities, community attitudes,imported and local goods, the economy, and the priceand availability of food [6]. There has been a call for a lessmedical, more preventative, public health approach tochildhood obesity that focuses on upstream, more distalcauses and interventions for prevention [7-9]. Such acomplex problem crossing many system levels wouldbenefit from an integrated approach to intervention.
Key concepts
Key concepts for this paper include intervention, synergy,sector, intersectoral collaboration, and v/h integration. Toclarify , we are not referring to the discussion of whetherspecific health problems should be dealt with separatelyor integrated with other health problems in a servicedelivery model [10,11]. Rather, we are looking at the inte-gration of a system of players, policies, and programswithin jurisdictions and across one or more related healthissues, in order to maximize people's wellbeing.
For our discussion here, an intervention is a single pub-
lic health activity meant to positively affect the health oftarget groups [12], whether that be aimed towards pre-vention, control, or reduction of negative conditions, orenhancement or maintenance of positive ones. Multipleintervention programs are organized, funded sets ofinterventions with coordinated, interconnected interven-tion strategies targeting at least two different levels of asystem ( e.g., individual behaviour change; organizational
change; municipal by-law change) even if each level hasonly one intervention [12]. Such programs are based onsocio-ecological models that attest that health is deter-mined by complex interactions between behavioural, bio-logical, cultural, social, environmental, economic, andpolitical factors. Determinants do not work indepen-dently but interact, and may mitigate or compound theeffects of other determinants. Effective population healthapproaches often reflect a socio-ecological framework[1,12,2].
Synergy is the interaction of two or more interventions,
such that their combined effect is greater than the sum oftheir individual effects [12].
The term 'sector' is often used to describe the division
of organizations along economic lines into three majorsectors: public, private, and non-profit [13]. Other com-mon uses of the term include describing different govern-
ment ministries within the same level ( e.g., federal or
provincial Ministry of Health, Ministry of Education) aswell as describing communities of interest based on issuecontent (education, housing, public health). However, inthis article we will be using 'sectors' to mean issue-basedentities ( e.g., education), because this can include private,
and non-profit organizations, as well as public ones withspecific jurisdictions.
V/h integration refers to combining and coordinating
efforts over multiple system levels, as well as across sec-tor levels within the same system level [14,15]. Integra-tion has structural components (such as a framework ofaligned groups, policies, and goals) and process compo-nents.
Inter-sectoral collaboration is a term often used for
integrated initiatives where both horizontal and verticaldimensions are key [16]. We are using vertical integrationin the Canadian sense, where for example multiple levelsof government (municipal, regional, provincial, and fed-eral) need to coordinate their efforts. When rapidresponses and time-limited approaches are required, ver-tical integration of programs are effective [17].
We are using horizontal integration to describe the
engagement of several sectors ( e.g., health, education,
agriculture, justice) at the same level. In Canada, horizon-tal integration occurs, for example, when one federalministry becomes the lead agency of several federal min-istries who work together to provide programs, policies,and research in an area of common interest and overlap-ping accountability. The purpose of horizontal integra-tion is to increase capacity, maximize resources, andminimize duplication of effort [15].
Combining vertical or horizontal approaches may have
b e n e f i t s  w h e n  t h e  h e a l t h  i s s u e  i s  c o m p l e x ,  r e q u i r i n g  amulti-sectoral response that spans both governmentaland non-governmental actors [18]. Benefits from addingvertical integration include: enhanced opportunities forsustainability; opportunity to work with more of theunderlying determinants; prevention of negative spinoffeffects for health systems and non-targeted populations;decreased duplication of services; and pooling of fundingor resources [17]. If horizontal integration is involved, keyfactors that are operating simultaneously in the variouscontexts of children's lives are more likely to be included.For example, if only the health sector is involved, impor-tant issues in education, community involvement, andsocial welfare may be ignore d. Horizontal involvement
brings opportunities to develop complementary, support-ive, synergistic programs and policies. Furthermore,other programs and policies in these sectors that maywork in opposition to the heal th initiative are more likely
to be identified or modified.
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 3 of 11
With solely horizontal approaches, intervention discus-
sions may remain at either the policy level across sectorsor at the service delivery sector, without attention to dif-fering levels of jurisdiction [17]. When vertical integra-tion is not part of the picture, important opportunities toprovide consistent inter-sectoral policy regulation andresources may be lost. Different kinds of interventions,with targets ranging from broad social determinants ofhealth dealt with at a federal level, down through provin-cial and municipal levels may not be provided in a consis-tent fashion. For example, the provision of tax deductionsfor fees paid by parents for children's sports and fitnessactivities in Canada is a federal government initiativemeant to increase accessibility to active living. Its effectswould be undermined if, at the municipal level, citiesraised user fees for sports and recreational activities andvenues.
Besides the additive advantages of combining v/h inte-
gration, there is also the possible advantage of producingsynergistic results. Such results could occur across sys-tem levels and sectors, in terms of the impacts of the var-ious staged, strategic interventions, the development ofcommitted initiative teams, and the potential spread ofsalience of the issues and interventions beyond thoseimmediately involved [1]. Most multiple interventionprograms rely on the effect of synergy that should comea s  r e s u l t  f r o m  t h e  c o m b i n e d  p r e s e n c e  o f  b o t h  t y p e s  o fintegration [1,17].
The findings on complex programs involving v/h inte-
gration have been mixed, partly due to a variety of meth-odological difficulties in evaluating multiple components,providing interventions of sufficient breadth andstrength, lack of sufficient penetration and reach in com-munities, lack of theoretical underpinnings, and by insuf-ficient intervention in policy and regulation [2]. However,the HIV/AIDS work in Africa is often cited as an exampleof v/h integration of complex and multiple interventionsshowing success [2,18]. In Kenya, for example, interven-tions have occurred in the areas of health policy, educa-tion for individuals, schools, and communities; increasedaccessibility to treatment and management, infrastruc-ture to support same, and counselling and social supportfor families [19]. Part of a national framework, theseactivities were aimed at national, provincial, district,community, household, and individual levels, andinvolved people from the public, private, civil, and com-munity sectors [19]. Improvements in HIV/AIDS trans-mission rates and treatment accessibility have beenattributed to this coordinated response. The Sub-SaharanAfrican countries, including Kenya, have National AIDSCommissions-coordinating bodies, often sitting outsidethe Ministry of Health that work with creating and main-taining v/h integration, among other things. In an evalua-tion of all the National AIDS Commissions in this region,Morah and Ihalainen conclude that, by and large, these
commissions have worked well in providing multi-sec-toral coordination, strong leadership, advocacy fornational frameworks, and engagement of non-govern-mental actors [18].
However, the commissions have had their difficulties.
I s s u e s  r e l e v a n t  t o  t h i s  p a p e r ,  b e y o n d  t h e  c o m m i s s i o n s 'unique structures and relationships to government, sug-gest that the process of maintaining v/h integration isimportant. Challenges in process include monitoring andevaluation of interventions, and difficulty reaching andacting on decisions quickly, due to an accompanying lack
of authority and accountability.
Thus, various functions and processes are required to
keep integrated programs and policies cohesive, coordi-nated, and evolving towards their goals and objectives.Positive and beneficial alignments require more thancommon goals; to be maintained and function properly,they require information flow and communicationamong and over levels, as well as coordination, compro-mise, and sharing boundaries. Without coherence indecisions over levels, not only may integration not work,but the system may lose authority and legitimacy [20].
For example, programming at the community or indi-
vidual level should be supported by provincial andnational activities. Progress toward a goal is enhanced bya common understanding of the problem and of the strat-egies to address it. Strategies are complementary to andsupport each other and build on each other. Communica-tion among different levels is such that each jurisdictioncan see how its role fits into a coordinated continuum ofservices, with mechanisms in place to identify andaddress any deviation from goals and functions. Thiscommunication and its feedback mechanisms help toplan integration, establish workable processes, and iden-tify when the integration is not working.
When developing policy and practice involving v/h
integration, several considerat ions are central. Including
both horizontal and vertical levels are important for pro-gram success, as this maximizes reinforcing and synergis-tic effects [12]. Including all the key players is also critical.Communication and feedback about system components,their coordination, and effectiveness are important [14],and structures are necessary for planning, designing, andmonitoring [21]. Coherence in decisions, plans, goals,and processes is the underlying purpose of this complexundertaking, and must be maintained [22]. Finally, rela-tionship building and maintenance are key to integrationeffectiveness over time and players [23].
The question then becomes, what does v/h integration
look like? What does it look like in the area of childhoodoverweight/obesity intervention? And what are the impli-cations for research, practice, and policy?
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 4 of 11
Discussion
Childhood overweight/obesity  and vertical/horizontal 
integration
As childhood overweight/obesity becomes more perva-
sive, and the indications of its complex, multi-levelsources of causation become more apparent [5,3,4], theneed for a multiple intervention program approach forpolicy and practice in the area is more evident. And thiscall for multi-level, multi-sector intervention requires theinvolvement of many different sectors in an integratedand targeted fashion.
The sustainability of intervention impact for obesity is a
critical problem faced by practitioners. Short-termbehavioural interventions seem not to be effective, par-ticularly in the absence of complementary interventionsthat address sustainability and foster an environment thatis supportive of long-term behavioural modification andsocietal level change [15,24]. In particular, a key recom-mendation of studies of school-based programs is that abroader involvement of stakeholders (educators, commu-nity, parents, and students) is needed to bring about asustainable impact. An important implication of this rec-ommendation is that effective obesity interventions in theschool setting require corresponding and linked inter-ventions at the family and community levels. This lendssupport to our premise that both vertical and horizontalintegration are critically required aspects of effectivechildhood obesity prevention programs. Challenges toinstituting v/h integrated approaches in Canada may behealth funding structures, which may make it difficult towork over provincial and federal levels. The federal gov-ernment, setting broad health policy, gives funds to theprovincial governments who are responsible for directprovision of services. Another factor may be discourage-ment for government and publicly-funded groups towork outside their mandates. McLaren et al . [15] recom-
mend a reward system for cross-sectoral engagement, orappointment of a specific public health committee acrossgovernment sectors [15].
Some obesity investigators report 'there is no consis-
tent, compelling portrait in favour of vertical integration'[15]. These same investigators suggest, however, that thismay be due to the limitations of randomized controlledtrial (RCT) and control group studies they examined, thebehavioural theoretical nature of many integrationapproaches suggested, and the virtual absence of'upstream' level factors incorporated into interventionapproaches. Another limitation to this conclusion is thatthe interventions they examined tended not to go verti-cally beyond community level. Indeed, McLaren et al .
[15] do call for intervention at the policy level and at thelarger social determinants level. The systematic examina-tion of horizontal integration has had little study to date,but has been called for [15]. Although we echo their rec-ommendations for inclusion of further levels into vertical
integration, we suggest that the evidence from socio-eco-logical systems approaches using literature beyond RCTreviews points to the usefulness of vertical integration,although not in isolation of horizontal integration[25,5,26-28]. We will review examples of successful v/hintegration in the understanding of childhood over-weight/obesity intervention and explore some of theimplications of these approaches for policy, research, andpractice.
When the childhood obesity literature was examined,
few studies were found that mentioned consideration of,or action related to, integration, in the way we use it. Sev-eral, however, identified the importance of factors relatedto integration and urged that future intervention researchand implementation include multiple levels of influence[8]. This becomes significant given that there is currentlyno firm evidence to support any specific interventionapproach to childhood overweight/obesity prevention,particularly of the single intervention type [25]. There ismore evidence supporting the use of multi-facetedapproaches that address both physical activity and nutri-tional issues [5,26,27].
Literature suggests consistent links and synergies
between and among individual, family, and community-based interventions may enhance the success of preven-tion initiatives [29,11]. Increasing involvement of deci-s i o n  m a k e r s  a n d  p o l i cy  m a k e r s  w o u l d  a l s o  b e  u s e f u l  b yenhancing links and synergies among sectors. Further,enhanced horizontal and vertical integration may, in turn,enhance sustainability [12] through stakeholder buy-in.However, as helpful as socio-ecological approaches are inconceptualizing the issue, their emphasis is typicallyacross system levels. Evidence suggests that coordinatedinterventions across sectors and within levels may also beimportant elements to prevention, control, and reductionof overweight/obesity in children. For example, in theirreview of the literature, McLaren et al . [15] call for incen-
tives supporting intersectoral integration in government,regulation of advertising and promotion of food to chil-dren, and fiscal policies to support healthy lifestyles,among others.
As interventions move to address the different settings
of the overweight/obese child's life (home, school, healthsystem) and over different system levels (school, commu-nity, physical and economic environments), it becomesim portan t to look at how those layers can support eachother. Considerations of v/h integration of policy andpractice become significant.
Vertically and horizontally integrated childhood 
overweight/obesity initiatives
Examples of successful intersectoral, integrated
approaches to childhood overweight/obesity, though few,
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 5 of 11
are emerging with promising results. For the most part,
these initiatives are relatively recent, and their final effec-tiveness is as yet unknown, but they do point out some ofthe issues that arise when integration is attempted acrossboth horizontal and vertical dimensions. Notable exam-ples are Action Schools! BC [30,31], Calgary HealthRegion's Community Prevention of Childhood ObesityProgram [32], the Strategic Alliance for Healthy Food andActivity Environments [33], the Consortium to LowerObesity in Chicago Children [34], and Arkansas' compre-hensive initiative to combat childhood and adolescento b e s i t y ,  b a s e d  o n  a  c r o s s - s e c t o r  a p p r o a c h  t h a t  i n v o l v e svertical integration of legislative powers at the state level[35].
A Canadian initiative, Action Schools! BC, is briefly
described next to provide an overview of how v/h inte-gration works and its importance to childhood obesityprevention programs. British Columbia's healthy schoolsinitiative, Actions Schools! BC, is based on a socio-eco-logical model and has implemented a school-based physi-cal activity and healthy eating program that was initiallyaimed at elementary school children, and later expandedto include high school students. The program is focusedon creating school environments where students aregiven many new opportunities to make healthy choices.Supportive community and provincial environments haveprovided the resources and political investment requiredto ensure program uptake and sustainability. An assess-ment of a 17-month pilot of this multilevel, partnership-based approach at the provincial and local levels foundpolicy development and funding and regulation changesthat were attributed, although not definitively, to theAction Schools! BC model and its implementation. Theresearchers concluded that the environment for schooland provincial action on health behaviours improved, andthat influential factors included political will and publicinterest [31].
Partnerships were formed horizontally across sectors
(health, education, tourism, sports, and relevant disci-plines) and vertically, from practitioners to decision mak-ers within the education sector. This integration wasaccomplished through three committees: a provincialadvisory committee (core community, school, and gov-ernment stakeholder representatives) that was horizon-tally integrated across evaluation and support teams andvertically integrated among education stakeholders; theAS! BC support team that assisted school advisory com-mittees; and a multidisciplinary evaluation team [31].The pilot evaluation included both outcome and processmeasures. The outcome evaluation found that students inthe intervention schools had increased physical activitylevels, heart health, bone health, dietary requirementassessment, and academic performance. No differenceswere found for body mass index (BMI), fruit and vegeta-ble consumption, and psychosocial variables such as self
esteem and motivation. The process evaluation foundthat administrators, teachers, and parents were very satis-fied with the program model and supported wider imple-mentation [30]. The combined success of programintegration, both horizontally across sectors and verti-cally over the levels of the education system (from schoolto province), and the pilot results convinced the provin-cial government to introduce the program province-wide[ 3 1 ] .  T h i s  i s  a  u n i q u e  i n i t i a t i v e  t h a t  p o i n t s  t o  t h e  l i n kbetween v/h integration and program effectiveness.
A conceptual framework
The more complex a set of interventions, the more likelyit is that a conceptual framework is necessary to helpdefine policy issues, practice requirements, and deter-mine processes and outcomes for research and evalua-tion. Indeed, this is the rationale behind logic models andother planning tools. Multiple intervention programsconducted over system levels and sectors require suchframeworks to guide planning, intervention, and evalua-tion [12].
We have adapted a two dimensional framework for
multi-level program integration and applied it to theAction Schools! BC program (as an example of a v/h inte-grated childhood obesity program) to illustrate how v/hintegration functions and to illuminate issues for discus-sion. The original framework derives from the report,Intersectoral Action ... Toward Population Health [36].The two dimensions are: a horizontal dimension linkingdifferent sectors or broad levels of activity or categories ofpartners across one level; and a vertical dimension, whichlinks different levels defined by geography, governmentlevels, or organizational levels within individual sectors.Creators of the original framework felt that includingboth dimensions, as well as all key players, is critical tothe success of such initiatives, as it maximizes 'reinforcingand synergistic effects' [36]. As can be seen in Figure 1,we have further adapted this framework to include thesystem levels (societal, organizational, community, fam-ily, individual) at which intervention policy and practicecan be aimed.
The arrows at the top and right side of the chart point
to the 'space' between sectors and levels. They are thereto draw attention to the interaction and linkages amongsectors and levels. These interactions and linkages indi-cate the processes of the actions. One of the critical chal-lenges of managing programs that are based oncollaboration with multiple sectors, partners, and gov-ernment/organizational levels is to work effectively at theboundaries, so-called 'boundary management.' It is ourview that the framework, though a very helpful presenta-tion of structure, still requires some modification. It nei-ther captures the dynamic nature of the interaction
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 6 of 11
Figure 1 An Integrated Intersectora l Intervention Framework : BC's Comprehensive Plan to Support St udent Health, with a focus on Action 
Schools! BC Childhood Obesity Pr evention Initiative (Source: Intersectoral Action To wards Population Health , Public Health Agency of Canada, June, 
1999 Adapted and Reproduced with the permission of the Minist er of Public Works and Gove rnment Services Canada, 2008.)System Levels Health Sector Education S ector  Rec/Sport Sector Food Sector 
NATIONAL                 Horizontal Integration among Sectors and Partners 
Societal • BC works with other provinces to develop common set of performance indicators of 
healthy behaviours.  
• Support for a new Pan Canadian Joint Consortium on School Health.   
PROVINCIAL                Horizontal Integration among Sectors and Partners 
Societal • New Health Promoting Schools Framework dev eloped; MOE works with other ministries, 
education partners, and provincial experts to develop policy framework. 
• Joint Education/Health Services forum is created to promote school health including 
(trustees, parents, educators, ministries and gov’t agencies, health groups, and researchers  
Organizational • Action Schools! BC is a best practices model to assist  schools create action plans to promote healthy living. A 
research  and funding partnership is formed with MOH, MOE, and 2010 LegaciesNow.  
• Three committees support the program team: PAC with representatives from core communities, schools, 
government and stakeholder group; a School Technical Committee; and the AS! BC Management Committee of 
funding partners and program team. 
• PAC ensures horizontal involvement across support and eval uation teams and vertical integration of education 
stakeholders (teachers, parents, principals, superintendents and trustees).  
• Partnership formed with education and health groups, nutritionists, and vending machine 
companies.   
• Joint MOH and MTSA 
consultations with  public 
health, recreation and sports stakeholders to identify a 
strategic agenda for physical 
activity.    
• MOH intensifies efforts to 
promote  physical activity, healthy eating and wellness. • Action plan to promote healthy foods and discontinue 
sales of junk food. 
• Expansion of AS! BC to all elementary and middle 
schools. 
• New standards for Phys. Ed with performance 
descriptions. 
• Revised curriculum for K-Gr.10. • MTSA commits 
to increasing physical activity 
levels. • Participation in 
programs to provide healthy 
food choices via vending machines. 
• Voluntary 
guidelines for sale 
of food in schools. 
Community and Family  
• MOE encourages increased parent and community 
involvement.   
MUNICIPAL/LOCAL                  Horizontal Integration among Sectors and Partners 
Societal • AS! BC focuses on creating safe and inclusive environm ents and supporting active living policies at the local 
level.  
Organizational • MOH directs the AS! BC 
initiative and is the lead funder. • School districts required to report sale of junk food 
(accountability). 
• School environment initiatives ( e.g., policies, 
assemblies, PD), school spirit. 
• MOE provides funding over two years.   
Community and 
Family • AS! BC fosters development of partnerships with families and community practitioners.  
• AS! BC support and evaluation teams establish connec tions with stakeholder and community partners ( e.g., 
school superintendents, recreation and parks associations, healthy living coalitions, parent advisory councils). 
• Family and community partnerships developed ( e.g., community activity experiences for students, nutrition 
 workshops, presentations to Parent Advisory Committees).  
Individual • AS! BC supports curriculum goal to deliver 150 minutes of scheduled physical education per week. 
• Initiative provides creative, altern ative physical activity ideas to complement phys. ed and support curriculum. 
• Initiative balances classroom action and phys. ed with opportunities for students, staff, and families to be 
physically active before and after school, and during lunch and recess.  
• AS! BC includes classroom actions ( e.g., Classroom Action 15x5, teaching resources and
equipment, integrating nutrition, and healthy living into classes), scheduled physical activity and extra-curricular activities. 
• Organized events for students and staff are included.   Vertical Inte gration across S ystem Levels 
MOH- Ministry of Health  
MOE- Ministry of 
Education  
MTSA- Ministry of 
Tourism, Sports and the Arts  
PAC- Provincial 
Advisory Committee  
Actions that 
are shared with another sector 
Actions that 
take place among levels and sectors, and also point to their 
interactions 
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 7 of 11
among levels, nor how a change in one level or cell may
impact or shift others. Shifts can occur as a result in achange in the context (an unexpected global epidemicrequires refocusing of health dollars away from obesityintervention), the boundaries ( e.g., funding changes result
in a loss of key coordinating people for service delivery-focused agencies;), across sectors (new policy agenciesare created), or even as a result of the intervention itself(success in intervening at one level of the system leads todrawing back of funding for another). A future directionis to develop new ways to capture these extra layers ofcomplexity to make a useful framework even more effec-tive.
Implications for research, policy, and practice
Obesity in children calls out for application and evalua-tion of intervention approaches addressing multiplecauses at multiple system levels. At the very least, theissue requires policy and programming that do notundermine what other jurisdictional levels and sectorsare attempting to do in their own spheres. Optimally, itrequires working in a strategic and coordinated fashionwith players, policies, and programs that use a compre-hensive, socio-ecological approach across sectors, as wella s  u p  a n d  d o w n  o v e r  l e v e l s ,  w i t h  a  f l e x i b l e  s k e l e t o n  o fstructures to support it and an efficient set of communi-cation linkages to maintain and change it: in other words,effective v/h integration of structures and process of mul-tiple intervention programs. Examination of examples,both in health and other sectors raise important issues toconsider in the areas of research, practice, and policy.
Research/evaluation
Evaluation of multiple intervention programs is often amanifold process that requires integrating the programmonitoring and evaluation design into the whole pro-gram planning process [12]. Childhood overweight/obe-sity interventions and interv ention studies involving v/h
integration are no exception. Standard multiple interven-tion program evaluation issues relevant to v/h integrationinclude: drawing on the inte rvention's theory and evi-
dence base to select and design an evaluation framework;developing a range of process and outcome indicators tocapture change at various socio-ecological system levelstargeted by multiple intervention programs; identifyingthe synergistic effects anticipated as a result of targetingmore than one system level and developing indicators tocapture them; developing tools that permit data collec-tion across organizations, levels, and systems; developingdata collection tools to capture coordinated and synergis-tic effects, not merely additi ve effects; and using ongoing
monitoring mechanisms for feedback and adjustment[12].Use of a conceptual framework such as the one above
helps determine not only whic h interventions to consider
and who to involve, but also what levels are employed,where synergies may lie, and with which stakeholders tocoordinate measurement tools and activities. It may alsoserve as a tool to determine the extent to which integra-tion is achi ev ed in  fut ur e initia ti ves, as we ll  as a t oo l t oenhance overall evaluation design. The spaces in betweenlevels and sectors provide the routes for process-the net-works, relationships, and interactions among the peopleinvolved in the different levels and sectors. To put such aframework into place, and use it to develop and maintaina well-functioning, collaborative network, requires boththe development of relationships and allocation of timeand resources to nurture and preserve them [23]. Thesetoo require evaluation, which needs to be planned at thestart as it could get lost in the complexity of the compo-nents later on [18].
The framework above reminds us not only to consider
development of indicators of outcome in terms of changein childhood overweight/obesity indicators, but in termsof process indicators of integration. Based on the exam-ples and application to the framework, some possibleevaluation indicators of successful, sound integration arepresented in Table 1.
While the framework and the indicators are a begin-
ning step, some questions still remain as to how best toevaluate interventions using v/h integration, as well as ofthe contribution of the v/h integration itself in a moredynamic fashion. We need to be able to capture synergiesof intervention processes and outcomes among levels andsectors, as well as determine how well the integration andits underlying processes are being maintained over time.Much more systematic examination needs to be con-ducted to understand the shorter- and longer-term trade-offs between horizontally-directed and vertically-ori-ented approaches [17] and the resulting contributions oftheir synergies. Further, evaluation of v/h integratedstrategies for childhood overweight/obesity requiresmore than measurement of the impact of the strategies interms of overweight/obesity-related outcomes, althoughthe ultimate outcomes of healthy children would stillremain the focus. Evaluation also requires measurementof the success of the integration itself, to determine thesuccess of the v/h activities as well as the degree of coor-dination among stakeholders. The framework and indica-tors bend to those purposes. Future research andevaluation, however, also need to determine whether theprocesses of integration are contributing toward the out-come, and if so, how much of the outcome can be attrib-uted to them, both positively and negatively. For example,will the mere fact that stakeholders are willing to expendthe resources and effort required to work together in a
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 8 of 11
complex fashion lead to intensified efforts by program
advocates, accounting for results beyond synergies andbroad determinant coverage?
Policy
The potential involvement of many stakeholders, frommultiple jurisdictions and sectors, including private ( e.g.,
food service industry in schools) and non-profit (commu-n i t y  a d v o c a c y  g r o u p s )  a s  w e l l  a s  p u b l i c  s e c t o r ,  c a l l s  f o rexamination and alignment of policy.
Structural issues of management and governance are
critical to the development of such v/h integration.Administrative and governance structures, as well asfunding mechanisms, are necessary to support suchwork. Some successful approaches have included workingwi t h i n  e x i s t i n g  g o v e r n a n c e  s t ru c t u r e s,  s u c h  as  oc c u rr edwith the Province of Ontario's Tobacco Control Strategy[37]. In the 1990's, funding was made available fortobacco initiatives. To access the provincial money, publichealth departments at the municipal level were asked tosubmit proposals on reducing/preventing tobacco use intheir jurisdiction. Work proposed had to include involve-ment with other departments in their municipalities todevelop an effective plan that supported horizontal inte-gration. In British Columbia, as part of the government's2005/06-2007/08 strategic plan, the premier asked everydepartment to indicate how they can contribute to pro-moting the public's health [38]. A similar approach couldbe taken for the prevention of childhood overweight/obe-sity.
Further policy work to consider for childhood over-
weight/obesity intervention is  the possibility of integra-
tion similar to what has been done with chronic diseaseinitiatives. Initiatives aimed at different, yet related healthissues benefit by joining forces (pooling resources, con-tributing to multiple health outcomes), thereby avoidingduplication and/or conflicting approaches among pro-grams. For instance, provincial and local Active Livinginitiatives may collaborate with federal EnvironmentalHealth initiatives-for example, learning about nature, cre-Table 1: Evaluation Indicators.
Program 
ElementIndicators
Integration 
StructureQuantity-how much integration has occurred 
relative to the amount  originally specified?
Who is involved-are all the relevant sectors 
and jurisdictions represented?
Level of support-are representatives merely 
seen to be at the table or are they truly involved (e.g., number of meetings attended, 
number of presentations made)?
Financial commitment-is it sufficient to meet 
needs for interventions of  sufficient intensity? 
Are there ties into funding allocation 
mechanisms; is funding offered to be sustained, renewed, or a one-time allocation?
Political will-is there access and approval by 
senior policy makers?
Bureaucratic will-is there access and approval 
by senior decision makers? Commitment of 
other resources-are time, people, and physical support in place?
Sustainability-are the necessary conditions 
met? 
Integration criteria-have they been sufficiently 
met to merit further funding?
Integration ProcessWhat is the quality of the integration: smooth, 
responsive to change and context, 
collaborative?
How are stakeholders involved; what is their 
level of commitment, resources, investment? 
What are the mechanisms for approval, involvement?
Does information flow both top down and 
bottom up?
Does information flow in a timely manner?What are the facilitators and barriers to the 
process? Have they been addressed?Who is accountable for th e intervention(s)? Is 
it shared over by the gr oup, or is it held by 
individual sectors and levels? With either 
scenario, how are decisions made, and by 
whom? Do all stakeholders feel they have 
some ownership?
How does the integrated program/
intervention manage the boundaries - the 
process of managing a fully 'integrated' 
intervention process is  highly complex and 
dynamic.Table 1: Evaluation Indicators. (Continued)
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 9 of 11
ating community gardens or trails. Such initiatives cross
traditional boundaries with outcomes of increasing phys-ical activity, healthy eating, and stress management, forexample, while fostering appreciation of the broader envi-ronment. How can these initiatives best be sustained andfully integrated into prevention programs?
Practice
The conduct of the interventions themselves requiresskilled practitioners at many levels operating in coordina-tion with each other. With childhood obesity, many typesof practice expertise are involved. Practitioners from thefields of education, health, social welfare, psychology andcounselling, nutrition, recreation, fitness, and urbanplanning could all be involved. To maintain this coordina-tion, and keep activities true to sectoral and jurisdictional
mandates requires effective relationships and timelycommunication and feedback through linkages and net-works. What kind of networks need to be established, andof what quality, in order for v/h integration to function?
Members of such types of integrated networks could
include a wide variety of partners (non-profit, non-gov-ernmental organizations, private sector, government,research groups, professional groups) forming broadcoalitions (indeed, coalitions of coalitions) and fundingconsortia at all government levels ( e.g., Canadian munici-
pal, provincial/territorial, and federal levels). Networkswill need to be sufficiently flexible and extensive to meetthe needs of a variety of partners. While most suchgroups may be initiated at the national level, the tobaccoexperience suggests that local advocacy groups may alsowork to start integrated, system-wide change. Supportsw i l l  n e e d  t o  b e  i n  p l a c e  t o  f a c i l i t a t e  b o t h  a p p r o a c h e s ,given the likely issues around ownership, interactionpreferences, and mandated realities. Communication andnetwork maintenance will be an important process func-tion.
How the program manages the linkages among sectors
and levels will have a significant impact on its success,and is a significant challenge. Beyond well-documentedpartnership and coalition-building relationship skills [14],another important component is accountability-who isaccountable to whom within the various structures of theintegrated program, and how do they relate to the pro-gram overall? Who is accountable for turning policy intoaction [21]? Is there anyone accountable over the wholeproject to ensure the integrity of the intervention andmaintain collaboration and linkages, without other roleconflicts [39]? Such accountability includes considerationof how the linkages are best developed, evaluated, andthen strengthened or eliminated, based on the evaluation.In other words, are there other players who work in thosespaces between framework cells, and can assist with and
augment the collaboration and integration functions?
We know that overweight/obesity has traditionally
been intransigent to short-term intervention, as previouswork involving long-term follow-up has shown [15,24];and further, that sustainability of obesity interventionsthemselves has been problematic [40,24]. Public healthinterventions aimed at childhood overweight/obesitymay well require full v/h integration to meet its goals.
If h/v integration occurs, childhood overweight/obesity
reduction outcomes may become more maintainable.Synergies produced as interventions from various levelsand sectors working off of each other's success hopefullywill result in increasing effectiveness of prevention andreduction efforts. The emphasis on integrated causal fac-tors and on involving stakeholders, including nonprofitsector obesity advocacy groups, may result in reducedstigma from society and from health practice, particularlyfor children's programming [41]. In the long term, v/hintegration can lead to new ways in how people relate totheir environment, and in how their environment relatesto them. The physical environment may become moreactivity friendly, technology may be reworked, mediamessages may change, and food service opportunitiesevolve. Linkages and networks begun now may provideongoing benefits as technology advances and our envi-ronmental context changes. Such linkages will allow formodulation of approaches at both micro and macro lev-els, and foster the innovation  required for sustainability.
Some final thoughts
Vertically and horizontally integrated obesity interven-
tion could play a role in helping understand the processesof such complex integrations. For example, from our per-spective, one subset of processes may be subsumableunder the construct of 'integrity.' Integrity conveys anotion of consistency and cohesiveness. While the term'integrity' can be defined as 'moral uprightness, honesty'or 'wholeness, completeness' [42], it also means: 'sound-ness; unimpaired or uncorrupted condition' [42]. The lat-ter definition reflects the sense with which we use it: thesense of the soundness or integrity of a true arrow. Sys-tems integrity uses the concept of judging the integrity ofsystems in terms of their ability to achieve their goals viaperceived and actual consistency of actions, values, meth-ods, measures, principles, expectations, and outcomes.Here, coherence, stability, unity, and wholeness are thekey components of integrity, including lack of impair-ment or degradation by disruptions in internal or externalenvironments. However, more work needs to be done ondelineating this construct, and how it may or may not dif-fer from other aspects of integration. Obesity work could
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 10 of 11
contribute to this understanding of what may be a crucial
function.
More importantly perhaps, what v/h integration may
achieve is a different way of thinking about the issue ofchildhood obesity as a society. We think about tobaccouse much differently now th an a decade ago, and our
expectations around its use are also different. In relationto preventing overweight/obesity, we need to think differ-ently about the environments we create, how we movearound them, and what opportunities our children haveto be socially nourished, physically active, and eat well,now and in the future.
Summary
Both v/h integration across sectors and over system levelsare needed to fully support multiple intervention pro-grams of the complexity and scope required by obesityissues. V/h integration requires attention to system integ-r i t y  a n d  p r o c e s s .  A  c o n c e p t u a l  f r a m e w o r k  i s  n e e d e d  t osupport policy alignment, multi-level evaluation, andongoing coordination of people at the front lines of prac-tice. However, use of such tools and of achieving integra-tion may enhance sustainability, increase effectiveness ofprevention and reduction efforts, decrease stigmatiza-tion, and lead to new ways to relate the environment topeople and people to the environment for better healthfor children.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors' contributions
All authors contributed to the literature review, conceptual development andwriting of the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Martha Pinheiros 
with the review of the literature for this paper. The work reported here was 
supported for all authors by the Ontari o Ministry of Health through a System-
Linked Research Grant to the Community Health Research Unit (CHRU). The 
Government of Ontario had no role in the developmen t of the manuscript. The 
opinions expressed here are those of the authors. Publication does not imply any endorsement of these views by either of the participating partners of the 
CHRU, or by the Government of Ontario.
Author Details
1Community Health Research Unit, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, 
Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada, 2Nursing, Epidemio logy and Community 
Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada, 
3Maternal Child Health Program, First Nations and Inuit Health Branch, 
Health Canada, Ottawa K1A 0G5, Canada, 4Nursing Best Practices Research 
Unit, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada, 
5Canadian Nurses Association, 50 Drivew ay, Ottawa, Ontario K2P 1E2, Canada, 
6School of Nursing, St. Francis Xavier University, PO Box 5000 Antigonish, NS 
B2G 2W5, Canada, 7Faculty of Nursing, University of Alberta, 3rd Floor Clinical 
Sciences Building Edmonton, Al berta, T6G 2G3, Canada  and 8Department of 
Nursing, Cape Breton University, PO Box 5300, Sydney, NS B1P 6L2, CanadaReferences
1. Edwards N, Mill J, Kothari AR: Multiple intervention research programs in 
community health .  Canadian Journal of Nursing Research  2004, 
36(1): 40-54.
2. Merzel C, D'Afflitti J: Reconsidering community-based health 
promotion: Promise, performance, and potential .  American Journal of 
Public Health  2003, 93(4): 557-574.
3. Pepin V, McMahan S, Swan PD: A social ecological approach to the 
obesity epidemic .  American Journal of Health Studies  2004, 
19(2): 122-125.
4. Hawks SR, Gast J: Weight loss management: A path lit darkly .  Health 
Education & Behavior  1998, 25(3): 371-382.
5. Doak CM, Visscher TLS, Renders CM, Seidell JC: The prevention of 
overweight and obesity in children and adolescents: A review of interventions and programmes .  Obesity Reviews  2006, 7(1): 111-136.
6. Cummins S, Macintyre S: 'Food deserts'-evidence and assumption in 
health policymaking .  British Medical Journal  2002, 325: 436-438.
7. Alderman J, Smith JA, Fried EJ, Daynard RA: Application of the law to the 
childhood obesity epidemic .  The Journal of Law, Medicine, & Ethics  2007, 
35(1): 90-112.
8. Maziekas MT, LeMura LM, Stodda rd NM, Kaecher S, Martucci T: Follow up 
exercise studies in paediatric obesity: Implications for long term effectiveness .  British Journal of Sports Medicine  2003, 37(5): 425-429.
9. Schwartz MB, Brownell KD: Actions necessary to prevent childhood 
obesity: Creating the climate for change .  The Journal of Law, Medicine & 
Ethics  2007, 35(1): 78-89.
10. Briggs CJ, Garner P: Strategies for integrating primary health services in 
middle and low-income countrie s at the point of delivery .  Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews  2006, 2:1-24.
11. Thomas P, While A: Should nurses be leaders of integrated health care?   
Journal of Nursing Management  2007, 15:643-648.
12. Edwards N, MacLean L, Estable A, Meyer M: Multiple Intervention Program 
recommendations for MHPSG Technical Review Committees  Ottawa: 
Community Health Research Unit, University of Ottawa; 2006. 
13. Febbraro AR, Hall MH, Parmegiani M: Developing a Typology of the 
Voluntary Health Sector in Canada: Definition and Classification Issues .  
Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada; 1999. 
14. Axelsson R, Axelsson SB: Integration and collaboration in public health - 
a conceptual framework .  International Journal of Health Planning and 
Management  2006, 21:75-88.
15. McLaren L, Shiell A, Ghali L, Lorenzetti D, Rock M, Huculak S: Are 
Integrated Approaches Working to Promote Healthy Weights and Prevent Obesity and Chronic Disease?   Calgary: Center for Health & 
Policy Studies, Dept Community and Health Services, University of Calgary; 2004. 
16. Crossing sectors - Experiences in intersectoral action public policy and 
health .  Ottawa: Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC); 2007. 
17. Clinton KM, MacDonald J, Edwards N, MacLean LM: Multiple Intervention 
Programs Invitational Symposia Series,3rd Annual Symposium: Achieving Vertical And Horizontal Integration in Multiple Intervention Programs: Issues 
In Structures, Processes, and Equity. Proceedings: 1-36, August, 2009; Ottawa   
[http://www.miptoolkit.com/images/s tories/mip/docs/MIP-Proceedings-
2009.pdf ].
18. Morah E, Ihalainen M: National AIDS commissions in Africa: 
Performance and emerging challenges .  Developmental Policy Review  
2009, 27(2): 184-214.
19. 'HIV/AIDS in Kenya.' The MIP Toolkit   2007 [http://www.miptoolkit.com/
index.php?option=com_content&view=category&id=26:hivaids-in-
kenya&Itemid=18&layout=default ]. Atieno, Pamela Juma
20. Besson S: From European integration to European integrity: Should 
European law speak with just one voice?   European Law Journal  2004, 
10(3): 257-281.
21. Mannheimer LN, Lehto J, Östlin P: Window of opportunity for 
intersectoral health policy in Sweden-open, half-open or half-shut?   
Health Promotion International  2007, 22(4): 307-315.
22. Organizational Structure   2008 [http://www.cdpac.ca/
content.php?doc=13 ]. Chronic Disease Prevention Alliance of Canada 
(CDPAC) Accessed June 16
23. Clinton KM, Edwards N, MacLean LM, Etowa J, Semenic S, Yanicki S: 
Proceedings of the Multiple Interven tion Programs Invitational Symposia 
Series, Inaugural Symposium: Changing  Contexts: 1-51 March 2007; Ottawa   
[http://aix1.uottawa.ca/~nedwards/english/MIPProceedingsEngl.pdf ].Received: 16 June 2009 Accepted: 17 May 2010 
Published: 17 May 2010
This article is available from: http://www.implementationscience.com/content/5/1/36© 2010 MacLean et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons. org/licenses/by/2.0 ), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
MacLean et al.  Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
http://www.implementationsc ience.com/content/5/1/36Page 11 of 11
24. Raine K: Overweight and Obesity in Canada: A Population Health 
Perspective .  Ottawa, ON: Canadian Institute of Health Information; 2004. 
25. Casey L, Crumley E: Addressing childhood obesity: The evidence for 
action .  Ottawa, ON: Partnership between the Canadian Association of 
Paediatric Health Centres (CAPHC); th e Paediatric Chairs of Canada (PCC) 
and the CIHR Institute of Nutrition, Metabolism and Diabetes (INMD); 2004. 
26. Summerbell CD, Waters E, Edmunds LD, Kelly S, Brown T, Campbell KJ: 
Interventions for preventing obesity in children .  Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews  2005, 3:1-86.
27. Thomas H, Ciliska D, Micucci S, Wilson-Abra J, Dobbins M: Effectiveness of 
physical activity enhancement and obesity prevention programs in children and youth .  Hamilton, ON: Effective Public Health Practice 
Project; 2004. 
28. MacLean L, Edwards N, Garrard M, Sims-Jones N, Clinton K, Ashley L: 
Obesity, stigma, and public health planning .  Health Promotion 
International  2009, 24:88-93.
29. Lobstein T, Baur L, Uauy R: Obesity in children and young people: a crisis 
in public health .  Obesity Reviews  2004, 5(Suppl 1): 4-85.
30. McKay H: Action Schools! BC. Phase 1 (pilot) evaluation report and 
recommendations. A report to the Ministry of Health Services  Vancouver, BC: 
University of British Columbia; 2004. 
31. Naylor PJ, Macdonald HM, Reed KE, McKay H: Action Schools! BC: A 
socioecological approach to modifying chronic disease risk factors in elementary school children .  Preventing Chronic Disease  2006, 3:1-8.
32. Community Prevention of Childhood Obesity   2004 [http://
www.calgaryhealthregion.ca/pro grams/childobesity/cpco.htm ]. Calgary 
Health Region
33. Promoting healthy food and activity environments   2005 [http://
eatbettermovemore.org/sa/index.html ]. Strategic Alliance for Healthy 
Food and Activity Environments
34. About CLOCC   2005 [http://www.clocc.net/about/about.html ]. 
Consortium to Lower Obesity in Chicago Children (CLOCC)
35. Ryan KM, Card-Higginson P, McCarthy SG, Justus MB, Thompson JW: 
Arkansas fights fat: Translating research into policy to combat childhood and adolescent obesity .  Health Affairs  2006, 25(4): 992-1004.
36. Health Canada Publications Intersectoral action towards population 
health. Report of the Federal/Provin cial/Territorial Advisory Committee 
on Population Health   1999 [http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/ph-sp/pdf/
inters-eng.pdf ]. Ottawa, ON: Public Health Agency of Canada
37. Ontario Tobacco Strategy   2006 [http://www.health.gov.on.ca/english/
public/updates/archives/hu_ 04/tobacco/tobacco_strat.html ]. 
Government of Ontario
38. British Columbia Government Strategic Plan 2005/06 - 2007/08   2005 
[http://www.bcbudget.gov.b c.ca/2005_Sept_Update/stplan/
default.htm ]. Government of British Columbia
39. MacLean L, Diem E, Bouchard C, Ro bertson-Palmer K, Edwards N, O'Hagan 
M: Complexity and team dynamics in Multiple Intervention Programs: 
Challenges and insights for public health psychology .  Journal of Health 
Psychology  2007, 12:341-351.
40. Improving the Health of Canadians .  Ottawa, ON: Canadian Population 
Health Initiative (CPHI), Canadian In stitute for Health Information; 2004. 
41. Saguy AC, Riley KW: Weighing both sides: Morality, mortality, and 
framing contests over obesity .  Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law  
2005, 30(5): 869-923.
42. Bisset A, Ed: Canadian Oxford Paperback Dictionary  Don Mills: Oxford 
University Press; 2000:514. 
doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-5-36
Cite this article as: MacLean et al. , Unpacking vertical and horizontal inte-
gration: childhood overweight/obesity programs and planning, a Canadian 
perspective Implementation Science  2010, 5:36
