1 
 
 
 
Title:  
 
Making concrete construals mindful: A novel approach for developing mindfulness 
and self -compassion to assist weight loss.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Michail Mantzios  
 
J. Clare Wilson  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Psychology & Health  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Corresponding Author:   
Michael Mantzios, University of Portsmouth, King Henry Building, King 
Henry I Street, Hampshire, Portsmouth, PO1 2DY, UK. e -mail: 
michael.mantzios@port.ac.uk  
 
2 
 
 
Abstract  
 
Research on the usefulness of mindfulness and self -compassion for dieting has focused on meditative 
practices. However, meditation can be  difficult to maintain, especially while dieting . Thus, the present 
research attempted  to induce mindfulness and self -compassion by using food diaries that required the 
participant to either focus on concrete (i.e., how they are eating) construals or abstract  (i.e., why they are 
eating)  construals. The concrete construals were expected to increase mindfulness and self -compassion, 
as well as decrease avoidance and negative thoughts (which  would further aid the develo pment of  
mindfulness and self -compassion). Study 1 found that mindfulness and self -compassion mediated the 
inverse relationship of avoidance and negative thoughts with weight loss. Study 2 showed that concrete 
construal diaries increased mindfulness and se lf-compassion, decreased avoidance and negative 
thoughts, and supported weight loss significantly more than the abstract construal diaries. Study 3 , then, 
compared the  concrete  construal  diaries with a mindful self -compassionate meditation program me. There  
was no difference in weight loss at the end of the intervention , but at a three -month follow -up, the diaries 
performed better at weight maintenance. Th us, the  concrete construal diaries may promote mindfulness 
and self -compassion and potentially promote  long-term weight loss.  
 
 
KEYWORDS: Self -Compassion; Mindfulness;  Construal Level Theory ; Weight Loss ; 
Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance;  Negative Automatic Thoughts  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
People often eat automatically (i.e., inattentive of present behaviour) and emotionally (i.e., often  
eat to avoid or allay negative emotions), and thus, many times overeat (see Blair, Lewis, & 
Booth, 1990; Cohen & Farley, 2008). Such everyday behaviours ha ve added to the problem of 
obesity and the associated health problems (e.g., Finucane  et al., 2011 ). To overcome this 
problem, recent research has established that practicing mindfulness and loving -kindness 
meditation  assist s weight loss by  increasing awareness of when and why participants are eating  
(Alberts, Thewissen, &  Raes, 2012; Mantzios & Wilson, 2013 a; Tapper et al., 2009). 
Mindfulness meditation  is paying attention in a particular way: “on purpose, in the present 
moment and non -judgmentally” (Kabat -Zinn, 1990, p. 4) , and loving -kindness meditation is a 
practice to develop attitudes of love, compassion and kindness for oneself and others (e.g., 
Chödrön, 1996 ). Loving -kindness meditation was shown to assist in  the develop ment of  self-
compassion (e.g., Davidson, 2007 ; Shapiro et al., 2005, 2007 ; Weibel, 2007 ). However, 
meditation requires  time and practice. Indeed,  it requires persistent practice for it to be effective, 
yet it is not uncommon for participants to cease meditation practice  or even to refuse to start 
(Mantzios & Wilson, 2013 a; Miller, Fletcher, &  Kabat -Zinn, 1998 ). Therefore, there is a need to 
discover alternative method s to gain  the benefits of mindfulness and self -compassion, without  
the discipline required to keep a meditat ive schedule . 
There are two reasons for investigat ing self-compassion and mindfulness  in the present 
research . First, self -compassion may amplify the effectiveness of mindfulness. Self-compassion  
is an adaptive way of relating to oneself when considering personal difficulties and failures, and 
involves three main (overlappin g and interactive) components: s elf-kindness (versus self -
judgment), feelings of common humanity (versus isolation), and mindfulness (versus over -
identification – see Neff, 2003a, b for review). Accordingly, it could be argue d that more self -
4 
 
kindness and common humanity (or less self -judgment and isolation) may actively foster and 
promote mindfulness . Similar ly, being  mindful  may allow someone  to notice that they are 
sufferin g, which enables one to understand  that they are not the only one s to suffer , and also 
assists to take a kinder approach towards oneself. Indeed, recent research indicated that  higher 
scores of self -compassion increased the effectiveness of mindfulness tra ining (B irnie, Speca, & 
Carlson, 2010) and mediated the relationship between mindfulness and well -being ( Hollis -
Walker & Colosimo, 2011), as well as mindfulness practice and stress (Shapiro, Astin, Bishop, 
& Cordova, 2005). Therefore, self -compassion appea rs to be a vital and essential aspect  when 
exploring the benefits of mindfulness  (see Baer, 2010 for review) . Second, self -compassion 
appeared to be a significant element  when evaluating the usefulness  of mindfulness on weight 
management. For example, rece nt research found that the combination of traits of mindfulness 
and self -compassion, as well as the combination of mindfulness and self -compassion 
interventions (i.e., mindfulness  and loving -kindness meditation ), assisted people more than 
mindfulness alone , or a control condition , in weight management  (see Mantzios & Wilson, 
2013 a; Mantzios, Wilson, Linnell, & Morris, 2013). Therefore, recent research emphasis es the 
role and inclusion of  self-compassion  within mindfulness  research when investigating  eating 
behaviours  and weight loss .  Compassion is suggested to uniquely stimulate a self-soothing 
system in the brain that assists affect regulation and redirects attention with feelings of 
gentleness and kindness (Gilbert, 2005; 2009); a feature that appears to be of additional 
assistance to people who aim  to lose weight. Nevertheless, compassion also requires some form 
of practice (and usually  some meditation ), which brings us back to  the previously discussed 
limitations and the need for alternative ways of deve loping mindfulness and self -compassion.  
5 
 
To find a viable alternative to meditation, two main components were thought to be 
needed , which are evident in both mindfulness and self -compassion. First, most meditation 
requires a present -centred awareness (see Brown & Ryan, 2003).  It is this present -centred 
awareness that results in a person accurately monitoring their current behaviour , which is vital 
for effective weight management (see Wing & Phelan, 2005). Second, lower self -criticism is also 
a component of mindfulness (e.g., non -judgmental awareness – see Kabat -Zinn, 200 6) and self -
compassion (i.e., self -kindness  vs. self -judgment , self -acceptance – see Neff, 2009). This lower 
notion of self-criticism (see also Gilbert, 2005)  allows failures in regulation to be seen as a part 
of a learning process , rather than reasons for giving up. These two components are found in 
social psychology literature, and more specifically,  in construal level theory (e.g., Liberman & 
Trope, 1998; McC rea, Liberman, Trope, & Sherman, 2008; Schmeichel, Vohs, & Duke, 2011).   
Construal level theory describes two core mind -sets set on a continuum of abstraction . 
Concrete construals  (or lower levels on this continuum) focus our attention on how we carry out 
behaviour, while abstract construals  (or higher levels on this continuum) focus  on why an action 
is being performed (Freitas, Gollwitzer, & Trope, 2004). So far, researchers have theorised that 
abstract construals are conceptually closer to mindfulness (e. g., Ayduk & Kross, 2010). Abstr act 
construals are described often  as using a temporal distancing technique, which allows the self to 
consider the past and future and then act according to goals and personal standards ( Fujita, 
Trope, Liberman, & Levin -Sagi,  2006 ). However, abstract construals may be  unsuitable  for 
develop ing mindfulness and self -compassion. Specifically, such abstract mind -sets (a) add a 
deliberate, confrontational, and evaluative perception to the present experience (e.g., Fujita & 
Roberts,  2010; Fujita et al., 2006)  and (b) make observ ation of  the present moment  more 
sporadic . For example, when people evaluate themselves to significant standards and goals – as 
6 
 
in temporal distancing or abstract construals (Fujita, 2008; Fujita et al., 2006)  – they are not only 
centring on the imaginary future, but they also set the scene for identifying personal 
inadequacies, failures and mistakes, which may be overwhelming and result in negative and 
mindless rumination, isolation and judgment (Kabat -Zinn, 1 990; Neff, 2009; Raes & Williams, 
2010). During mindfulness practice, attention is on concrete aspects of the present experience, to 
eventually enable people to increasingly identify and step back from their abstract or evaluative 
thoughts (Kabat -Zinn, 199 0). Furthermore, self -compassion assists to focus even  more closely  on 
concrete aspects of personal suffering (e.g., negative automatic thoughts) , rather than everything 
else (e.g., pleasant or neutral thoughts) that surface  in the present moment  (see Neff  & Germer, 
2013) . This way,  people are more readily available to identify distress, and tolerate  such distress  
by offering kindness and a collective understanding to oneself (see Baer, 2010; Gilbert, 2009 ; 
Neff, 2003b; Neff, 2009 ), without being distracted  by everything else that co -occurs in the 
present moment . Therefore, the present research explore d the ability of concrete construals to 
assist  in the development of mindfulness and self -compassion.  
The two reasons that make abstract construals unsuitable  are precisely the same that 
make concrete construal s more suitable for the development of mindfulness and self -compassion . 
First, concrete construals promote attention to the present behaviour. For example, McCrea et al. 
(2008) sent p articipants a questionnaire that activated concrete or abstract construals and were  
asked to return it by email. Participants in the concrete construal group returned the 
questionnaire faster, because self -control was assisted by  the increas ed present -focused 
orientat ion (see McCrea et al., 2008; see also Schmeichel et al., 2011). Second, as concrete 
construal focus  on the how of behaviour , they  rarely require  further judgement or prompt  self-
critical attitudes. This  is similar to mindfulness and self -compassion , which  are associated with 
7 
 
less analysis, judgement, mindlessness,  rumination , and isolation  (Brown & Ryan, 2003; Kabat -
Zinn, 1990; Neff, 2003b; see also Raes, 2010; Raes  & Williams, 2010 ). Therefore , concrete 
construals  could potentially mimic mindfulness  (i.e., being attentive and aware of the present 
moment, non - or at least less -judgmentally) , as well as  self-compassion, as non -judgment  may 
possibly limit  unkind and isolated  interpretations of the self, or, in other words, limit the exa ct 
opposite of se lf-compassion (see Neff, 2003a, b) .  
However, there is one limitation that needs address ing – that is, the procedural nature of 
concrete construals. Concrete construals  can be  solely procedural , and thus, tend to completely 
focus on one part of the present moment without any awareness of other experiences that co -
occur (e.g., see Csikszentmihalyi, 1990). Some people may use this technique  to avoid or escape 
negative thoughts , emotions  or behaviours  that are part of the presen t experience  (e.g., feeling 
stressed),  but are not part of the procedure  at hand (e.g., eating) . For example, people may 
mindlessly overeat while concentrating on another task  (e.g., reading the paper) , or, more 
relevant to this research,  getting  absorb ed in what one is  eating , where the person  avoids the  
possibility of feeling any distress in the moment  (i.e., at least  until food is accessible  or until 
there is no more room for food  – see Heatherton &  Baumeister, 1991  for review ). Thus , rather 
than an accepting  and toleran t attitude  of all the present experience s (especially  the experiences  
that relate to personal suffering ), part of the present may be suppressed  (Purdon, 1999) . This 
way, the reality of the present moment may be more self -indulging and a hedonic pursuit of 
pleasure (or avoidance of displeasure ).  Hayes (2004) referred to such phenomenon as 
‘experiential avoidance’. To increase awareness of the present moment, experiential acceptance 
or exposure (instead of avoidance)  is required. Therefo re, the present research incorporated 
8 
 
exposure  and acceptance of the present moment into  the procedural nature of concrete construals 
to promote mindfulness ( henceforth referred to as mindful concrete construals ).   
As previously discussed, a voidance  is a practice  of keeping away or withdrawing from  
something undesirable  or a source of conflict, and is often used as a coping mechanism 
(Ottenbreit  & Dobson, 2004). Dieters must often avoid urges to eat  (and overeat) . Paradoxically, 
suppressing thoughts of food, appetite, or cravings  may increase the occurrence and intensity of 
such urges  (e.g., Wegner, Schneider, Carter, & White, 1987), leading to subsequent failure in 
regulating food intake (Barnes &  Tantleff -Dunn, 2010). However,  mindfully  accepting urges has 
proven useful in lowering the reoccurrence of such unwanted  thoughts and impulses (Alberts, 
Mulkens, Smeets, & Thewissen, 2010).  Thus, t he present research explore d whether  mindfulness 
and self-compassion  – as well as if mindful concrete construals  – could  assist in reducing  
cognitive -behavioural avoidance.  
Moreover, c ognitive -behavioural  avoidance is often the avoidance of negative automatic 
thoughts . Decreasing  cognitive -behavioural  avoidance may increase  the presence of negative 
automatic thoughts.  Avoidance and negative automatic thoughts can be  part of a  vicious cycle 
that ends only when there is nothing to avoid or run away from. However, e ven if there are 
higher levels of avoidance, the strength of ne gative automatic  thoughts may  still increase. 
Indeed, the paradoxical effects of avoidance have been described in past research (see Wegner et 
al., 1987 for rebound effect), where one’s avoidance adds emphasis on what is to be avoided. 
Thus,  such thoughts can potentially sabotage weight loss efforts, mainly because people are 
unable to control them (Wegner  & Erber , 1992) , and because negative automatic thoughts may 
lead to emotional eating  (e.g., Baer, Fisher, & Huss, 2006 ; Kuehnel & Wadden, 1994 ), whether 
they are avoiding or not .  
9 
 
In fact , frequent dieters can be particular sensitised to such automatic thoughts , as they 
have become more self -critical and judgemental over past dieting failures , or because they worry  
about potential dieting failure s in the  future (Gilbert & Procter, 2006; Leary, 2004). However,  
self-compassion and mindfulness have  been associated with less rumination and thought 
suppression  (see Arch & Craske, 2006;  Neff, 2003a ; Ramel et al., 2005 ); thus, supporting the 
notion that those  dieters who score high in self -compassion and mindfulness would not dwell 
over real or imagined shortcomings, neither would they try to avoid them . The significance of 
self-compassion , beyond mindfulness, is the centralis ed focus on personal suffering, where 
dieters are targeting negative automatic thoughts , and in turn, a main cause of avoidance (see 
Neff & Germer, 201 3 for review on other differences between mindfulness and self -
compassion). Thus, developing mindfulness an d self-compassion may be particularly 
challenging for this group , but mindfulness and self -compassion may also be significant 
benefactors of well -being and weight loss . 
The main aim of this paper was to explore whether mindful concrete constuals can 
become  a tool for people who are unable to use traditional methods of cultivating mindfulness 
and self -compassion. Further , it was expected that concrete construals would  increase 
mindfulness and self -compassion, as well as decrease avoidance and negative thoughts. The 
present research attempted , initially , to explore the relationship between mindfulness, self -
compassion, cognitive -behavioural avoidance, negative automatic thoughts, and weight loss. 
Findings from the initial study were investigated further in a second study , which attempted  to 
induce mindfulness and self -compassion by using food diaries that required the participant to 
either focus on mindful concrete or abstract construals . A third stud y compared the effectiveness 
10 
 
of the mindful concrete construals to a mindful self -compassionate meditation schedule in terms 
of developing mindfulness and self -compassion, and  their usefulness for  weight loss.  
 
 
Study 1:  
Exploring the role of Mindfulness,  Self-Compassion, Cognitive -behavioural Avoidance and 
Negative Automatic Thoughts on Weight Loss  
 
Before attempting to induce mindfulness without  meditation, it is important to show that 
being higher in the trait of mindfulness and self -compass ion result s in better weight 
management. Thus, this study  aimed  to explor e if higher levels of mindfulness and  self-
compassion improved weight management and if they did so  (at least partially) by  reducing 
cognitive -behavioural avoidance and negative autom atic thoughts.  
Method  
 
Participants  
 
 Two-hundred and forty -three  undergraduate students were invited to participate from a 
University in Greece. The sample consisted of 119 females and 124  males ( n=243 ), with a Body 
Mass Index of M= 25.62 (SD=4.24 ) and 123 participants being of average weight (i.e., BMI <25) 
and 120 above average (i.e., BMI>25) . 
 
Instruments  
   
Participant information form.   This form asks for the participants' gender, height and weight  and 
weight after 5 weeks .   
 
11 
 
Self-compassion Scale (Neff, 2003).  The scale calculates the qualities of the self-compassion 
construct. Responses are ranging from 1 ( almost never) to 5 ( almost always) . It is a 26 -item scale 
(with overall scores ranging from 26 to 130) and it  is composed of six subscales: sel f-kindness, 
self-judgment, common humanity, isolation, mindfulness and  over-identification  (see also 
Mantzios, Wilson, & Giannou, 2013 for translated scale) . Sample items are “When I’m feeling 
down I tend to obsess and fixate on everything that’s wrong” (i .e., over -identification) and “I try 
to be understanding and patient toward aspects of my personality I don't like” (i.e., self -
kindness). The present study produced an alpha of . 79.  
 
Mindful Attention and Awareness Scale (Brown & Ryan, 2003).  The scale is a 15 -item, single 
factor instrument that measures one’s tendency to function on “automatic pilot” without attention 
to present experience. Responses are ranging from 1 ( almost always ) to 6 ( almost  never ) and 
include, for example, “I forget a person’s name almost as soon as I’ve been told it for the first 
time”  and “I rush through activities without being really attentive to them”  (see Mantzios, 
Wilson, & Giannou, 2013) .  The overall scores range from 15 to 90 and t he present study 
produced an alpha of  .85. 
 
Automatic Thoughts Questionnaire (Hollon  & Kendall, 1980).  The Automatic Thoughts 
Questionnaire is a 30 -item questionnaire used to assess negative cognition by measuring the 
cognitive self -statements of an individual. Responses are ranging from 1 ( not at all) to 5 ( all the 
time) , with total scores ranging from 30  to 150, and  include items such as “I feel so helpless” and 
“I wish I were somewhere else” . Individuals respond with higher scores indicating increased 
12 
 
occurrences of negative automatic thoughts. The authors reported good internal consistency (α = 
.97). The present study produced an alpha of  .87. 
 
Cognitive Behavioral Avoidance Scale (Ottenbreit  & Dobson, 2004).  The Cognitive -Behavioural 
Avoidance Scale is a 31 -item self -report measure that assesses cognitive/ behavioural  and 
social/non -social avoidance. Res ponses are ranging from 1 ( not at all true for me) to 5 ( extremely 
true for me) , with total scores ranging from 31 to 155, and items such as “ I quit activities that 
challenge me too much ” and “ I avoid making decisions about my future ”. Higher scores indicate 
greater avoidance and the scale has good internal consistency (α=.91; Ottenbreit  & Dobson, 
2004). The present study produced an alpha of .90. 
  
 
Procedure and Design  
 
 Potential participants responded to an advertisement on University grounds , which 
invited people who were trying to lose weight to  participate in this study. Participants who 
wished to take part were given a questionnaire pack  at baseline . After the completion of the 
questionnaires, two general practitioners (of both genders) took me asurements of weight and 
height and measured their weight again after 5 weeks. The recorded weight difference was used 
as the variable indicated as Weight Loss . The consent form attained  permission to access this 
data (i.e., the weight measurements) from participants .  
Results and Discussion  
 
Initially, this study aimed to explore whether Mindfulness and Self -Compassion would 
13 
 
predict weight loss independently, as well as together, and thus, explore the additional variance 
of self -compassion. Weight Loss was predicted independently by Mindfulness [adjusted R2 = 
.309, F (1, 241 ) = 109.4, p< .001] and by Self -Compassion [adjusted R2 = .181 , F (1, 241) = 
54.5, p< .001], but even more so by combin ing the two variables [adjusted R2 = .355, F (2, 240 ) 
= 67.7, p< .001]. Indeed, there was a significant difference between Self -Compassion and 
Mindfulness in predicting Weight Loss (∆R2 = .05, p< .001). The relationship between Weight 
Loss  with Mindfulness and Self-Compassion was positive, [β  = .56 , p < .001; β =  .43, p < .001, 
respectively], thus increases in Self-Compassion and/or Mindfulness were associated with 
Weight Loss .  
Next, four mediation analyses were conducted  (see Baron &  Kenny , 1986  for mediation 
analysis review) , two for each of the predictor variables, Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance and 
Negative Automatic Thoughts , on the outcome variable Weight Loss , with Self -compassion and 
Mindfulness as potential mediators . 
  First, Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance  predicted Weight Loss ( β = -.035, SE =.01, p< 
.001)  and Mindfulness (β = -.27, SE =.05, p< .001) , Mindfulness predicted Weight Loss (β =.11, 
SE =.01, p< .001) , and the relationship between Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance  and Weight 
Loss  was significantly reduced when Mindfulness was included in the model (β = -.006, SE = 
.009, p= .48) , z = -4.85, p< .001  (see Figure 1) . Second,  Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance  
predicted Weight Loss ( β = -.035, SE = .01, p< .001)  and Self -Compassion (β = -.27, SE = .04, 
p< .001) , Self -Compassion predicted Weight Loss ( β =.09, SE =.01, p< .001) , and the 
relationship between Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance  and Weight Loss was significantly 
reduced when Self -Compassion was included in the model (β = -.01, SE = .01, p = .29) , z = -
5.40, p = .0001  (see Figure 1) . Third, Negative Aut omatic Thoughts  predicted Weight Loss ( β = -
14 
 
.04, SE =.01, p< .001) and Mindfulness (β = -.22, SE =.05, p< .001) , Mindfulness predicted 
Weight Loss ( β = .10, SE = .01, p< .001) , and the relationship between Negative Automatic 
Thoughts  and Weight Loss  was significantly reduced when Mindfulness was included in the 
model (β = -.02, SE =.008, p< .01) , z = -4.02, p< .001  (see Figure 2) . Fourth,  Negative Automatic 
Thoughts  predicted Weight Loss ( β = -.04, SE = .01, p< .001)  and Self -Compassion (β = -.31, 
SE = .04, p< .001) , Self -Compassion predicted Weight  Loss  (β = .09, SE =.01, p< .001) , and the 
relationship between Negative Automatic Thoughts  and Weight Loss was significantly reduced 
when Self -Compassion was included in the model (β = -.02, SE = .01, p> .05), z = -5.87, p = .001  
(see Figure 2) . 
 Baron and Kenny (1986) described  that when the relationship between predictor and 
outcome is no longer statistically significant once the mediator is entered into the model, there is 
an occurrence of full mediatio n; whereas  in a similar context, a reduction in the strength of the 
association, however, with remaining above zero depicts  a partial mediation. Accordingly, the 
third mediation was partial, while the rest were full mediations.  
 
INSERT FIGURE 1& 2 HERE  
  
Study 2 : Concrete vs. Abstract Construals  
 
 The previous study demonstrated t hat mindfulness and self -compassion may be useful in  
weight loss;  therefore , the present study so ught a method of developing mindfulness without  
meditation.  Specifically, t his study explored whether mindful concrete construals were as 
effective in weight loss as mindfulness appeared  to be  in past research  (Mantzios & Wilson, 
2013 a; Tapper et al., 2009 ). It is important to note that these mindful concrete  construals  created 
15 
 
a more experiential mindset  (for review, see Hayes, 2004; see also Kabat -Zinn, 1990) rather than 
being solely procedural as described in construal level theory (e.g., Freitas, Gollwitzer, & Trope, 
2004 ). Further, to ensure they were being used regularly , a food diary was used that promote d 
frequent concreteness (i.e., at every meal through a diary – compared to the usual  single  
experimental manipulation  in construal experiments ). This study used present -centred attention 
and awareness to create an attitude of acceptance or non -judgment (Brown &  Ryan , 2004) . Some 
benefits of this diary should also be noticeable  in self -compassion (e.g., increase in mindful 
awareness, ability to recognize suffering,  steadily  lower ing self-judgement  and over-
identifica tion, etc.).  Thus, the present study explored whether these mindful  concrete construal  
diaries  increase mindfulness and  self-compassion , and in turn , whether they assist ed weight loss, 
compared  to abstract construals . Finally , the present study also tried to understand if the mindful  
concrete construals displayed similar associations  to both cognitive -behavioural avoidance  and 
negative automatic thoughts  as in past mindfulness research  (e.g., Mantzios et al., 2013) . 
 
Method  
 
Participants  
 
 One-hundred and thirty -six undergraduate students were invited to participate from a 
University in Greece. Sixty -one students failed to return for the follow -up measurements and 
three did not fulfil the daily entry requirements of the diary (described in detail below), an d were 
therefore excluded from any further analyses. The final sample consisted of 30 females and 42 
males ( n=72) with a Body Mass Index of M= 25.55 (SD=4.78) and Age M= 21.11( SD=3.64 ). 
Materials  
  
16 
 
 The following measures were used to construct an event based diary and a self -
report questionnaire. The order of the measures was randomised. Questionnaires and 
supporting materials are available by contacting the first author . 
Mental Construal Manipulatio n 
  
 The present study manipulated construal levels in a manner that was proven successful in 
several previous experiments (e.g., Freitas, Gollwitzer, & Trope, 2004; Fujita et al., 2006; 
Liberman, Trope, McCrea, & Sherman, 2007). In particular, participant s spent a few moments 
prior and during meals considering how to eat (concrete construal condition) or why to eat the 
present meal (abstract construal condition). Procedural questions like, ‘How does it smell?’ 
primed people into a concrete mindset, but wit h mindful awareness, while purpose oriented 
questions primed participants into an abstract construal (e.g., ‘why is it important to eat less?’). It 
should be noted that participants were considering emotions and thoughts that were relevant to 
the present b ehaviour of eating. This way, people were present focused with an open awareness 
instead of being overly immersed in the behaviour. The questions came in a pocket -diary that 
was used for 5 weeks as an event based account at every meal. The diaries formed a  basis for 
exclusion from the final analyses, whereby participants who did not have at least three entries 
daily were omit ted from the results . Such exclusion protocol was also used for the third study . 
 
 
Instruments  
  
  
 We used the same scales as in Study 1. The reliabilities for the scales were as follows: 
α=.76/.76 for Self-compassion Scale, α=.87/.89 for Mindful Attention Awareness Scale , 
17 
 
α=.94/.94  for Automatic thoughts Questionnaire , α=.89/.90  for Cognitive -Behaviour al 
Avoidance Scale.  
  
Procedure  
 
 Participants for all studies in this paper  were recruited through posters and 
announcements in classrooms, informing students that there would be sessions , which  would test 
possible methods of assisting weight loss. Participants who responded and attended one of those 
sessions received the questionnaire, were measured in weight and height, and were randomly 
placed in one of two construal groups. People in  both con strual c onditions recei ved instructions 
on how to complete the diaries and when to use them.  
 After five -weeks, participants completed an identical questionnaire and their weight was 
measured again. Both pre - and post - weight measurements were performed w ith the help of two 
medical doctors (1 male, 1 female). Also, diaries were returned to the researchers to evaluate 
attendance to the diary and possible exclusions , if certain participants neglected to use it.  
All studies adhere d to the  ethical  guidelines o f the British Psychological Society.  
Results and Discussion  
 
Preliminary Drop -out analysis    
Of the 64 who failed to attend a follow -up session  or did not complete the diary , 27 were in the 
mindful concrete construal group and 34  in the abstract construal group. Analyses were 
conducted to test significant differences in Intervention Groups, Age, Gender , Body Mass Index 
(BMI: kg/m2), Self -compassion, Mindfulness, Negative Automatic Thoughts, and Cognitive -
Behavioural Avoidance betwe en those who did participant and those who dropped out. The two 
groups did not dif fer in Intervention Group assigned  χ2 (1) = .30, ns; Age F(1, 134) = .82, ns;  
18 
 
baseline measurements of BMI, F(1, 134) = .26, ns; Self-compassion , F(1, 134) = .13, ns; 
Mindfulness , F(1, 134) = 2.38, ns; Negative Automatic Thoughts , F(1, 134) = 1.49, ns; and 
Cognitive and Behavioural Avoidance , F(1, 134) = 1.72, ns. However, t here was a difference in 
Gender , χ2 (1) = 5.03, p < .05, with more females dropping -out than males  (39 vs. 25, 
correspondingly ). 
 
Main Analyses  
  Participants in the Concrete Construal group lost significantly more weight ( M= 1.33 kg, 
SD=.99) compared to participants in the Abstract Construal group  (M = .53 kg, SD =.85) ( t(70) = 
8.60, p<.001, η2=.510 ). 
Next, four 2 (Construal Type: Abstract, Concrete) x 2( Time : Pre, Post) ANOVAs with 
repeated measures on the last factor were conducted on the Self -Compassion, Mindfulness , 
Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance, and Negative Automatic Thoughts scales.  
  With Self-compassion as the dependent variable, there was a significant main effect of 
Time : F(1, 70) = 5.44,  p = .02, p² = .07 (see Table 1). There was a non -significant main effect 
of Construal Type: F(1, 70) = 2.67,  p = .11, p² = .04 and a significa nt interaction between 
Intervention and Construal Type, F(1, 70) = 63.81, p< .001, p² = .48. There was also a 
significant main effect for Mind fulness which also increased over time, Time : F(1, 70) = 10.62,  
p< .01, p² = .13. The main effect of Construal Type was also significant as the Abstract 
Construal Group scored significantly lower in Mindfulness  than the  Concrete Construal Group ,  
F(1, 70) = 20.43,  p< .001, p² = .23. Finally, there was a significant interaction:  F(1, 70) = 
130.90, p< .001, p² = .65, with the Abstract Construal Group decreasing  in Mindfulness,  and the 
Concrete Construal Group increasing in Mindfulness  over t his time period (see Table 1).  
19 
 
  With Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance, t here was a non -significant main effect for 
Time : F(1, 70) = .11,  p = .74, p² < .01; and Construal Type:  F(1, 70) = 1.89,  p = .17, p² = .03; 
but there was a significant interaction:  F(1, 70) = 58.73, p< .001, p² = .46. As seen in Table 1, 
although the Concrete Construal Group decreased their scores from pre to post, the Abstract 
Construal Group increased their scores across time.  
  For the Negative Automatic Thoughts, t here was a significant main effect of Time , F(1, 
70) = 6.03,  p = .02 , p² = .08; a significant main effect of Construal Type:  F(1, 70) = 4.98,  p = 
.03, p² = .07; as well as a significant interaction:  F(1, 70) = 69.88, p< .001, p² = .50]. As shown 
in Table 1, Concrete Construal scores were significantly lower than Abstra ct Construal scores. 
Further, Concrete Construal scores decreased over time whereas Abstract Construal scores 
slightly increased over the same time period.  
  Results indicated that there was an overall positive effect of the Concrete Construal type, 
loweri ng C ognitive -Behavioural Avoidance and Negative Automatic Thoughts and increasing 
Mindfulness and  Self-compassion compared to the Abstract type diary that showed the exact 
opposite consequence.    
   
INSERT TABLE 1 HERE  
 
Study 3 : Concrete and self -compassionate construals  vs. Mindfulness and  Loving -Kindness 
Meditation  
 
 Considering findings from the previous studies, this study investigated w hether mindful 
concrete construals, wi th self -compassionate messages to maximis e the self-compassionate 
manipulation ( referred to as mindful self -compassionate construals ) could perform as well as a 
meditation  schedule that was used successfully in recent  weight loss researc h. Specifically, this 
20 
 
meditation schedule (i.e., a mindful self -compassionate intervention  that combined mindfulness 
and loving -kindness meditation) assisted dieters more than mindfulness meditation alone or a  
control condition  (see Mantzios & Wilson, 2013 a for review). The present  study proposed that  
mindful self -compas sionate construals  may perform similar to meditation, while construals may 
perform better in maintaining mindfulness and  self-compassion after the intervention, because it 
is more automatic and effortless compared to meditation (see Bargh, 1997 for review on 
automaticity). Accordingly, both construal and meditation interventions  were tested for  5 weeks 
and participants were followed -up 3 mo nths later.  
 
Method  
 
Participants  
 
 A sample of 122 Undergraduate Students was invited to participate from a Northern 
Greek College. Twenty -four students were excluded from the analyses as they quit the 
meditative practice ( n=11) or failed to maintain  the use of the construal diary ( n=13).  The final 
sample consisted of 41 females and 57 males ( n=98)  with a mean Body Mass Index of 25.7 9 
(SD=3.97 ) and Age M=23.30 ( SD=5.53).  
 
Materials  
 
Mental Construal Manipulation  
 
 Participants spent a few moments prio r and during meals considering how to eat 
(concrete construal condition), that is, present oriented and infused with self-compassionate 
messages [e.g., ‘how important is it for me and all people to eat healthy?’ (Common Humanity) 
21 
 
or ‘How kind are you to yourself now that you eat this meal?’ (Self -Kindness). The questions 
came in a diary that was used for 5 weeks as an even t-based diary for every meal .  
 
Instruction manual and meditation schedule  
 
 A protocol was adopted outlining mindfulness and self -comp assion meditation ( Mantzios 
& Wilson, 2013 a). Mindfulness meditation  and mindfulness of  walking  were introduced in day 
one. Day two consisted of eating meditation , desirable food meditation and a feeling of hunger 
mental scale  (e.g., Levine, 2007) . In Day three, participants were introduced to a slightly 
modified meditation that integrated self-compassion into the meditation practice already learnt 
(e.g., Chödrön  & Otro, 2001).  
 Note that similar exclusion protocols were kept for the construal group as in S tudy two, 
while  for the meditation group participants , who missed more than 3 days , were also excluded .  
 
Instruments  
 Description of instruments used can be found in Study 1. The reliabilities for the scales 
were as follows: α=.75/.88 for the Self-compassion Scale and α=.87/.86 at both instances for 
Mindful Attention Awareness Scale.  
Procedure  
 
 Participants responded to an advertisement on University grounds about participating in a 
study that could assist them if they were trying to lose weig ht. Participants did not receive any 
nutritional help or weight loss advice and were advised to diet the same way they did in the past .  
 Participants were given the questionnaires, subsequently were measured in weight and 
height, and were placed in the Co nstrual Group or the Meditation Group. Participants in the 
Construal Group received instructions on how to complete and when to use the diaries.  
22 
 
 The Meditation Group participated in a three day introduction to Mindfulness  and 
Loving-Kindness Meditation a nd were  asked to practice at least 3 times a day (early morning, 
lunch time and in the afternoon) with the counsellor at a specified area on campus, at set times, 
and to return after 5 weeks to record any weight differences. A daily -log was kept to record 
attendance and help with exclusion due to non -attendance.  
 After 5 weeks, participants’ weight was measured, as well as Mindfulness and  Self-
compassion scores. Participants responded at a 3 -month follow -up weight check , to see whether 
construals  revealed any differences in weight regain compared to the meditation group. All 
measurements were taken from two general practitioners (i.e., 1 male and 1 female) in all three 
instances of weight measurements. Also, diaries were returned to the researcher  to evaluate 
attendance to the diary and possible exclusions if participants neglected to use it.  
 
Results and Discussion  
 
Preliminary Drop -out analyses  
   
  A drop -out analysis was conducted to test significant differences in Intervention Groups, 
Age, Gender, Body Mass Index (BMI), Self -compassion and Mindfulness between participants 
and drop -outs.  The analysis showed that drop -outs and those who participated did not differ in 
Intervention Groups  assigned  χ2 (1) = . 21, ns; baseline measurements such as Age F(1, 120) = 
.81, ns; BMI, F(1, 120) = .82, ns; Self-compassion , F(1, 120) = .92, ns; and Mindfulness , F(1, 
120) = 1.18, ns. However, again t here was a difference in Gender, χ2 (1) = 8.49, p < .0 1, with 
more females dropping -out than males ( 18 vs. 6, correspondingly).  
 
Main Analyses  
23 
 
 
Two 2(Group Type: Meditation, Construal) x 2(Time: Pre, Post) ANOVAs with repeated 
measures on the Time was conducted on th e Self -compassion and Mindfulness.  
For Self -compassion, there was a significant main effect of Time: F(1, 96) = 21.57,  p< 
.001, with both groups increasing in Self -compassion over the time period (see Table 2). 
However, there was a non -significant main e ffect of Group Type: F(1, 96) = .34,  p = .56. There 
was also a non -significant interaction between Time and Group Type, F(1, 96) = 3.03, p = .09.  
For Mindfulness, there was a significant main effect of Time: F(1, 96) = 292.19,  p< .001 
with both groups again increasing over time in their Mindfulness  scores (see Table 2). There 
was also a significant main effect of Group Type, F(1, 96) = 4.93,  p = .03, with the Meditation 
Group scoring significantly high both pre - and post - Time t han the Construal Group. However, a 
non-significant interaction was found between Time and Group  Type, F(1, 96) = .20, p = .66. 
Results indicated that both Times produced similar outcomes when it came to increasing 
Mindfulness and Self -Compassion.  
 
INSERT TABLE 2 HERE  
 
  Additionally, another 2(Group Type: Meditation, Construal) x 2(Time: Post, Follow -up) 
ANOVA with repeated measures on the Time was conducted on weight loss. A significant main 
effect of Time was found: F(1, 96) = 288.83,  p < .001 from post to follow -up measurements (see 
Table 3). However, there was a non -significant main effect of Group Type, F(1, 96) = .71,  p = 
.40, with the Meditation Group producing similar weight loss to the Construal Group. Last, a 
significant interacti on between Time and Group Type was observed, F(1, 96) = 54.04, p < .001. 
24 
 
As shown in Table 3, whilst the two groups did not differ in weight loss post -intervention, by the 
follow -up period, the Construal Group had lost more weight (that is, regained less w eight) than 
the Meditation Group.  
 
INSERT TABLE 3 HERE  
General Discussion  
 
 The present research  explicitly explored in three  studies : (a) if mindfulness and  self-
compassion predict weight loss and whether they mediate the effect of cognitive -behavioural 
avoidance and negative automatic thoughts  on weight loss ; (b) whether mindful concrete 
construals can increase mindfulness and  self-compassion  and decrease cognitive -behavioural 
avoidance and negative automatic thoughts ; and (c) if mindful self -compassiona te construals 
assist weight loss  and maintenance ; all of which will be reviewed in turn .  
  First, results showed that mindfulness and  self-compassion positively predict weight loss, 
while negative automatic thoughts and cognitive -behavioural avoidance inversely predict weight 
loss. Further, results revealed  mindfulness and  self-compassion mediating the relationship 
betw een negative automatic thoughts, as well as cognitive -behavioural avoidance  and weight 
loss. Findings are consistent with  recent  researc h that demonstrated a similar  relationship 
between mindfulness , self-compassion , and negative automatic thoughts (Mantzios et al., 2013). 
This study also offer s possible explanations as to how other mindfulness -based interventions 
may have assisted people who were trying to lose weight in past research (e.g., Tapper et al., 
2009). Furthermore, self -compassion appeared of greater s upport in aiding weight main tenance 
(Mantzios et al., 2013);  while this study found  that mindfulness may be of greater value for 
weight loss. Future research should explore differences between weight loss and maintenance in 
25 
 
relation to mindfulness and self -compassion. These  preliminary findings highlight the need to 
explore both mindfulness and self -compassion to successfully help people manage their weight.  
  Second , results indicated that mindful  concrete construals increased mindfulness and  self-
compassion, while abstract construals reduced them. Moreover, participants who were primed 
concretely showed a decrease in cogni tive-behavioural avoidance and negative automatic 
thoughts . This was  consistent  with the findings in Study 1 and past  research that suggested 
mindfulness  and self-compassion to be  associated to adaptive functioning and well -being (Brown 
& Ryan, 2003; Levesque & Brown, 2007; Mantzios & Wilson, 2013 a; Neff, 2003 b). 
Furthermore, mindful concrete construals contributed towards gr eater weight loss compared to 
abstract construals. Results contradict past findings (e.g., Fujita, 2008) a s mindful concrete 
construals appear ed to perform better than abstract construals in self -regulating behaviour. 
However, mindful concrete construals have not been  compared in previous research. The lesser 
weight loss observed in  the abstract construal group may be explained through the reported  
increase in cogni tive-behavioural avoidance and negative automatic thoughts. As already 
mentioned, abstract  construals link influential future aspects (that give purpose and drive ) with 
present behaviour, which may add evaluative and self -punitive perception s to the present 
experience (e.g., Fujita & Roberts, 2010; Fujita, et al., 2006). These may easily lead to further 
avoidance, as dieters are confronted with failures and inadequacies , including judging 
themselves (e.g., ‘you are such a looser, stop thinking of the cookies’) and their behaviours  (e.g., 
‘you had your cookie, but now you need to go hungry to make up for your failure’). Suffering 
becomes the likely result in the present moment. Thus, abstract construals may resemble a  more  
uncompassionate and mindless self.  Future research should att empt a deeper exploration of 
negative, self -punitive and self -critical thoughts and explore the interaction between avoidance 
26 
 
and thoughts that may be disruptive of effective dieting. This way, a new method of making 
abstract construals more constructive ( e.g., more self-compassionate) may be a better way of 
tolerating the distress that comes with dieting behaviour , and eventually, lead to more  effective  
dieting . 
  Third , this study investigated whether a mindful self -compassionate construal  diary 
performed similarly well to a successful mindful self -compassionate  meditation program me for 
weight loss. The goal was to use construals  to enable one to be mindful and compassionate 
without the ‘musts’ and ‘shoulds’ that make experiences (including meditation  and dieting ) every 
so often intolerable and judgemental (e.g., ‘I should meditate before lunch’ or ‘I need to meditate 
to see positive results’) . Keeping a mindful concrete construal  diary may  have activate d relevant 
mental representations in a subtle, unnoticeable fashion, whereby, the unaware, unintended 
effects of this activation are observed at a later stage (see Bargh & Chartrand, 2000). Such 
obligations or commitments  can be set off by relevant external stimuli without the person’s 
purpose to act that way or awareness of their conduct (see Dijksterhuis, Chartrand, & Aarts, 
2007). In other words, participants were aware that they completed a food diary , but may have 
been unaware  that this diary primed them  to be more mindful and self -compassionate. Results 
indicated that the construal group worked in a similar fashion to the meditation practice, 
increasing mindfulness , self-compassion , and  weight loss  over time . Findings  are consistent  with 
recent research that observed  participants in a mindful self -compassionate meditation program me 
losing significantly more  weight than control participants (see Mantzios & Wilson, 2013 a). 
However , the present study  may also suggest  that construals appear  to be a gentler, less 
exhausting method to cultivate mindfulne ss and self -compassion  in comparison to meditation , 
which in turn , assisted weight maintenance . Indeed , the 3 -month follow -up revealed that the 
27 
 
diary group regained signi ficantly less weight compared to the meditation group. Overall, r esults 
could suggest  that mindful concrete construals  were more effortless  than meditation  and could , 
therefore , have been  more easily maintained ; but such a case was not explored in the present 
study and  remains a question for future research . Despite our efforts in following participants’ 
progress, this study could have benefited from extending the follow -up periods.  
 Another  issue that did arise throughout the present research was the number of 
participants who did not complete each study. Each study tended to demand a lot of work from  
participants , which may have been difficult for some people to persist . This has also been an 
issue with meditation research, especially with participant s new to meditation ( Mantzios & 
Wilson, 2013 a; Miller et al., 1998).  However, whether the drop -out was strictly related to 
construal interventions or dieting, or the combinations of both , remains a question for future 
research.  Another future direction cou ld be to investigate adherence to such construal diary with 
people who maintain their weight, which is less demanding than losing weight.  Finally, the 
attrition rate of female participants  is noteworthy . Although there may be many reasons for this , 
there are two aspects that may help explain it . First, this loss of female participants may have 
been the outcome of having a male researcher on -site and actively involved, as well as a male 
meditation counsellor. Weight loss is a sensitive issue for man y people, and at times, sharing 
personal information with the opposite sex may be more difficult than sharing with  a same sex 
researcher/counsellor. Whether female participants required further help from a female 
researcher/counsellor and felt too embarras sed or uncomfortable to ask the male researcher 
remains a question for future research. Second, there may have been  cultural factors that 
disadvantaged female participants to maintain participation . In particular, traditionally f emales 
are expected to focu s on others and not themselves, which may have worked against maintainin g 
28 
 
participation . As the research was based in a university , one might not expect such traditional 
values  to be present , however, it is interesting to note that more males volunteered t o take part in 
each study, which is unusual. Again, further research is needed to clarify this. Overall, i t may be 
that the present findings would be more robust if larger sample sizes had been obtained.  
Moreover, the use of students in the studies may ha ve affected the results. Most students 
are committed to an abstract mind -set, where their present behaviour is regulated according to 
future goals (e.g., pass the exams, earn a degree, etc.). If this assumption  is true, then the effect 
of mindful concrete construals may have been stronger (but also more conflicting), than a sample 
of retirees that are more interested in enjoying their family  each moment or focus on the activity  
of the day . Therefore, caution sho uld be used when interpreting the results, and future research 
should include other samples that may put forward  results that are  more representative of the 
population.  
Furthermore, although adhering to the diary  intervention may have been  easier;  requiri ng 
participants to complete diaries with every meal still requires self -discipline  and conscious effort . 
Future research might use less invasive construal  methods  (such as messages on food packaging, 
placemats, plates, commercials, phone apps etc.) instead of diaries.  
Also, the lack of a control group in the third study  should be addressed . As it stands,  there 
is no clear indication whether a simple dieting group would have performed similarly to the 
meditation or construal intervention. Then again , a recent longitudinal study indicated that the 
same meditation protocol assisted participants to lose more weight than a control group (see 
Mantzios & Wilson, 2013 a). Future research should address this limitation and possibly use a 
controlled food envir onment (e.g., a boarding school or a secluded military base) or a similar diet 
plan to attain more accurate results  on effects of psychological interventions .  
29 
 
A final limitation worth mentioning is the lack of manipulation check or pre -test to assess 
whether concrete diaries accurately influenced construal levels. This limitation leaves room for 
other theories and interpretations to emerge and explain the positive results achieved by 
participants in these studie s. For example, counteractive control theory (Trope & Fishbach, 
2000) suggests that exposure to temptations may involuntarily trigger goal -directed behaviour 
via mindsets that  activat e the long -term goal. In fact, exposure to temptations directs towards 
superior goal importance and intentions, as well as enhanced goal -directed behaviour; hence, 
assisting successful self -regulation and successful weight management (see Kroese, Evers, & 
DeRidder, 2009; see also Mantzios & Wilson, 2013b). Also, exposing onesel f to the present 
moment is a leading concept in mindfulness and self -compassion literature  (Gilbert, 2009; 
Kabat -Zinn, 2006 ; Neff, 2003a) , and show another theoretical overlap that may lead to 
supplementary  future research.  Without exposing oneself to the present moment, dieters fail to 
address the importance of dealing with their eating behaviour right here, right now; but also fail 
to notice when the time is right to take a more compassionate approach , especially  when feeling 
distress ed over resisting pal atable foods, or, even when failing to do so successfully  (see Adams 
& Leary, 2007) .    
To conclude, the present results are significant for both health behaviour modification 
and applied social psychology research. Results showed weight loss being more ef fectively 
managed by concrete construals  that are more mindful and self -compassionate , rather than by 
abstract  construals that are more mindless and uncompassionate towards the self. Another 
significant finding is  that there are other means to develop mind fulness  and self-compassion 
apart from the  traditional  meditation practice , which opens the door to other methods that may be 
highly important for people who are not able, willing or ready to meditate .  
30 
 
References  
 
 
Adams, C. E., &  Leary, M. R. (2007). Promoting self -compassionate attitudes toward eating 
among restrictive and guilty eaters. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 26 (10), 
1120 -1144.  
Alberts, H. J. E. M., Mulkens, S., Smeets, M., &  Thewissen, R. (2010). Coping with food 
cravings. Investigating the potential of a mindfulness -based intervention. Appetite, 55 (1), 
160-163.  
Alberts, H. J. E. M., Thewissen, R., & Raes, L. (2012). Dealing with problematic eating 
behaviour. The effects of  a mindfulness -based intervention on eating behaviour, food 
cravings, dichotomous thinking and body image concern.  Appetite, 58 (3), 847 -851.  
Arch, J. J., &  Craske, M. G. (2006). Mechanisms of mindfulness: Emotion regulation following a 
focused breathing induction. Behavior Research and Therapy, 44 , 1849 –1858.  
Ayduk, Ö., & Kross, E. (2010). Analyzing negative experiences without ruminating: the role of 
self‐distancing in enabling adaptive self ‐reflection. Social and Personality Psychology 
Compass, 4 (10), 841 -854. 
Baer, R. A. (2010). Self -compassion as a mechanism of change in mindfulness - and acceptance -
based treatments. In R. A. Baer (Ed.), Assessing Mindfuln ess & Acceptance Processes 
in Clients (pp. 135 –154). Oakland: New Harbinger.   
Baer, R. A., Fischer, S., & Huss, D. B. (2005). Mindfulness and acceptance in the treatment  of 
disordered eating. Journal of Rational -Emotive & Cognitive -Behavior Therapy, 23 , 
281–299. 
31 
 
Bargh, J. A. (1997). Automaticity in social psychology. In E. T. Higgins & A.W. Kruglanski 
(Eds.), Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles  (pp. 169 –183). New York: 
Guilford.  
Bargh, J. A., & Chartrand, T. L. (2000). The mind in the middle: A practical guide to priming 
and automaticity research. In H. T. Reis & C. M. Judd (Eds.), Handbook of research 
methods in social and personality psychology  (pp. 253 -285). New York: Cambridge 
University Press.  
Barnes, R. D., & Tantleff -Dunn, S. (2010). Food for thought: Examining the relationship 
between food thought suppression and weight -related outcomes. Eating Behaviors, 11 (3), 
175-179.  
Birnie, K., Speca, M., & Carlson, L. E. (2010). Exploring self ‐compassion and empathy in the 
context of mindfulness ‐based stress reduction (MBSR). Stress and Health, 26 (5), 359 -
371.  
Blair, A., Lewis, V., & Booth, D. A. (1990). Does emotional eating interfere with success in 
attempts at weight control? Appetite, 15 (2), 151 -157.  
Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2003).The benefits of being present: mindfulness  and its role in 
psychological well -being.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84 (4), 822 -848.  
Brown, K. W., & Ryan, R. M. (2004). Perils and promise in defining and measuring 
mindfulness: Observations from  experience. Clinical Psychology: Science and 
Practice, 11 (3), 242 -248.  
Chödrön, P. (1996). Awakening loving -kindness . Boston, MA: Shambhala Publications.  
Chödrön, P., & Otro, T. (2001). Tonglen: The path of transformation .Halifax, Nova Scotia: 
Vajradhatu Publications.  
Cohen, D. A., & Farley, T. A. (2008). Eating as an automatic behavior. Prev Chronic Dis, 5 (1), 
A23.  
32 
 
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Flow: The psychology of optimal experience.  New York: 
Harper/Collins.  
Dijksterhuis, A., Chartrand, T. L., & Aarts , H. (2007). Effects of Priming and Perception on 
Social Behavior and Goal Pursuit. In J. A. Bargh (Ed.), S ocial psychology and the 
unconscious: The automaticity of higher mental processes  (pp. 51 –131). New York: 
Psychological Press.  
Finucane, M. M., Stevens, G. A., Cowan, M. J., Danaei, G., Lin, J. K., Paciorek, C. J., . . . 
Bahalim, A. N. (2011). National, regional, and global trends in body -mass index since 
1980: systematic analysis of health examination surveys and epidemiological studies 
with 960 country -years and 9.1 million participants. The Lancet, 377 (9765), 557 -567.  
Freitas, A. L., Gollwitzer, P., & Trope, Y. (2004).  The influence of abstract and concrete 
mindsets on anticipating and guiding others' self -regulatory efforts. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 40 (6), 739 -752.  
Fujita, K. (2008). Seeing the Forest Beyond the Trees: A Construal Level Approach to Self 
Control. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2 (3), 1475 -1496.  
Fujita, K., & Roberts, J. C. (2010).  Promoting prospective self -control through abstraction. 
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46 (6), 1049 -1054.  
Fujita, K., Trope, Y., Liberman, N., & Levin -Sagi, M. (2006). Construal levels and self -control. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychol ogy, 90 (3), 351 -367.  
Gilbert, P. (2005). Compassion: Conceptualisations, research and use in psychotherapy . New 
York: Routledge.  
Gilbert, P. (2009). The compassionate mind . London: Constable  
Gilbert, P., & Procter, S. (2006). Compassionate mind training for people with high shame and 
self‐criticism: overview and pilot study of a group therapy approach. Clinical Psychology 
& Psychotherapy, 13 (6), 353 -379.  
33 
 
Hayes, S. C. (2004). Acceptance and commitment therapy, relational frame theory, and the third 
wave of behavioural and cognitive therapies. Behavior Therapy, 35 (4), 639 -665. 
Heatherton, T. F., & Baumeister, R. F. (1991). Binge eating as escape from self -awareness.  
Psychological Bulletin, 110 (1), 86 -108.  
Hollis -Walker, L., & Colosimo, K. (2011). Mindfulness, self -compassion, and happiness in non -
meditators: A theoretical and empirical examination. Personality and Individual 
Differences, 50 (2), 222 -227.  
Hollon, S. D., & Kendall, P. C. (1980). Cognitive self -statements in depression: Development of 
an automatic thoughts questionnaire. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 4 (4), 383 -395. 
Kabat -Zinn, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the wisdom of your body a nd mind to face 
stress, pain, and illness . New York: Delacourt.  
Kabat -Zinn, J. (2006). Coming to our senses: healing ourselves and the world through 
mindfulness.  New York: Hyperion.  
Kroese, F. M., Evers, C., & De Ridder, D. T. D. (2009). How chocolate keep s you slim: The 
effect of food temptations on weight watching goal importance, intentions, and eating 
behavior. Appetite, 53 , 430 -433. 
Kuehnel, R. H., & Wadden, T. A. (1994). Binge eating disorder, weight cycling and 
psychopathology. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 15 , 321 -329. 
Lattimore, P., Fisher, N., & Malinowski, P. (2011). A cross -sectional investigation of trait 
disinhibition and its association with mindfulness and  impulsivity. Appetite, 56 (2), 241 -
248. 
Leary, M. R. (2004). The curse of the self: Self -awareness, egotism, and the quality of human 
life: Oxford University Press, USA.  
34 
 
Levesque, C., & Brown, K. W. (2007). Mindfulness  as a moderator of the effect of implicit 
motivational self -concept on day -to-day behavioral motivation. Motiva tion and Emotion, 
31(4), 284 -299. 
Levine, N. (2007). Against the stream: a Buddhist manual for spiritual revolutionaries . New 
York: HarperOne.  
Liberman, N., & Trope, Y. (1998). The role of feasibility and desirability considerations in near 
and distant fut ure decisions: A test of temporal construal theory. Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology , 75, 5 –18. 
Liberman, N., Trope, Y., McCrea, S. M., & Sherman, S. J. (2007).The effect of level of construal 
on the temporal distance of activity enactment. Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 43 (1), 143 -149.  
Mantzios, M., & Wilson, J. C. (2013 a). Exploring Mindfulness and Mindfulness with Self -
Compassion centred interventions to assist weight loss – Theoretical conside rations and 
preliminary results of a  longitudinal study,  Submitted for publication  
Mantzios, M. & Wilson, J. C. (2013b). Self -compassion and mindfulness promote adaptive self -
regulation and deter maladaptive eating attitudes: Exploring the distinctive contribution 
of self -compassion, Submitt ed for publication  
Mantzios , M., Wilson, J. C. & Giannou, K. (2013). Psychometric properties of the Greek 
versions of the Self -Compassion and Mindful Attention and Awareness scales, 
Mindfulness , 1-10. 
Mantzios, M., Wilson, J . C., Linnell, M., &  Morris, P. (2013 ). Negative cognitions encourage 
weight gain and awareness and acceptance encourage weight loss in stressful situations: 
Exploring the positive role of Self -Compassion.  Submitted for publication  
35 
 
McCrea, S. M., Liberman, N., Trope, Y., & Sh erman, S. J. (2008).  Construal level and 
procrastination.  Psychological Science, 19 (12), 1308 -1314.  
Miller, J., Fletcher, K., & Kabat -Zinn, J. (1995). Three -year follow -up and clinical implications 
of a mindfulness -based stress reduction intervention in t he treatment of anxiety 
disorders. Gen Hosp Psychiatry, 17 , 192 -200. 
Neff, K. D. (2003a). The development and validation of a scale to measure self -compassion. Self 
and Identity, 2 (3), 223 -250.  
Neff, K. D. (2003b). Self -compassion: An alternative conceptu alization of a healthy attitude 
toward oneself. Self and Identity, 2 (2), 85 -101. 
Neff, K. D. (2009). The role of self -compassion in development: A healthier way to relate to 
oneself. Human Development, 52 (4), 211 -214. 
Neff, K. D., & Germer, C. K. (2013).  A pilot study and randomized controlled trial of the 
mindful self ‐compassion program. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69(1) , 28-44. 
Ottenbreit, N. D., & Dobson, K. S. (2004).  Avoidance and depression: the construction of the 
Cognitive -Behavioral Avoidance Scale. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 42 (3), 293 -
313. 
Purdon, C. (1999). Thought suppression and psychopathology. Behaviour Research and 
Therapy, 37 (11), 1029 -1054.  
Raes, F.  (2010). Rumination and worry as mediators of the relationship between self -compassion 
and depression and anxiety. Personality and Individual Differences, 48 (6), 757 -761.  
Raes, F., & Williams, J.M.G. (2010). The Relationship between Mindfulness and  
Uncont rollability  of Ruminative Thinking  . Mindfulness 1 (4), 199-203. 
Ramel, W., Goldin, P. R., Carmona, P. E., & McQuaid, J.R. (200 5). The effects of mindfulness 
meditation on cognitive processes and affect in patients with past depression. Cognitive 
Therapy and Research, 28 , 433 –455. 
36 
 
Schmeichel, B. J., Vohs, K. D., & Duke, S. C. (2011).  Self-control at high and low levels of 
mental construal. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2 (2), 182 -189.  
Shapiro, S. L., Astin, J. A., Bishop, S. R., & Cordova, M. (2005). Mindfulness -based stress 
reduction for health care professionals: results from a randomized trial. International 
Journal of Stress Management, 12 (2), 164 -176.  
Shapiro, S. L., Brown, K. W., & Biegel, G. M. (2007). Teaching self -care to caregiver s: Effects 
of mindfulness -based stress reduction on the mental health of therapists in training. 
Training and Education in Professional Psychology, 1 (2), 105 -115.  
Tapper, K., Shaw, C., Ilsley, J., Hill, A. J., Bond, F. W., & Moore, L. (2009). Exploratory 
randomised co ntrolled trial of a mindfulness -based weight loss intervention for women. 
Appetite, 52 (2), 396 -404.  
Trope, Y., & Fishbach, A. (2000). Counteractive self -control in overcoming temptation. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 79 , 493 –506. 
Weibel, D. T. (2007). A loving -kindness intervention: Boosting compassion for self and others.  
Retrieved from the Ohio University Theses databas e (Document number: 
ohiou1190652251 ): http://etd.ohiolink.edu/view.cgi?acc_num=ohiou1190652251   
Wegner, D. M., & Erber, R. (1992). The hyperaccessibility of suppressed thoughts. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology,  63(6), 903 -912.  
Wegner, D. M., Schneider, D. J., Carter, S. R., & White, T. L. (1987). Paradoxical effects of 
thought suppression. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 53 (1), 5 -13.  
Wing, R. R., & Phelan, S. (2005). Long -term weight loss mainten ance. The American Journal of 
Clinical Nutrition, 82 (1), 222S -225S.  
 
 
 
37 
 
Table 1 
Means and Standard Deviations for Concrete Construal group (n=36) and Abstract Construal 
group (n=36), pre - and post - intervention.  
Note:   NAT Q=Negative Automatic Thought Questionnaire, CBAS = Cognitive -Behavioural Avoidance 
Scale, MAAS = Mindful Attention and Awareness Scale, SCS= Self-compassion Scale.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
  Mean  (SD) 
 Measures  Pre Post 
Concrete  NATQ  52.06 (15.56)  46.92 (14.77)  
 CBAS  67.94 (19.62)  64.86 (20.04)  
 MAAS  65.72 (10.90)  67.36 (10.29)  
 SCS 93.03 (14.58)  94.14 (13.55)  
Abstract  NATQ  58.17 (21.99)  60.97 (23.31)  
 CBAS  70.89 (17.11)  74.25 (19.58)  
 MAAS  54.78 (13.61)  51.83 (14.51)  
 SCS 89.94 (9.52)  87.92 (9.95)  
38 
 
Table 2 
T-Test means and Standard Deviations for Self -Compassionate Construal group  (n=48) and Meditation 
group  (n=50), pre - and post -intervention.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Note:  MAAS = Mindful Attention and Awareness Scale, SCS= Self-compassion Scale.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
  Mean  (SD)  
 Measures  Pre Post 
Construal  SCS 85.15  (13.31)  87.38  (16.85)  
 MAAS  54.08  (13.17)  57.79  (12.53)  
Meditation  SCS 85.56  (13.21)  90.46  (17.32)  
 MAAS  59.80  (12.52)  63.32  (12.10)  
39 
 
Table 3  
Means and Standard Deviations of weight lost (in kg) for Self-Compassionate Construal group  (n=48) 
and Meditation group  (n=50), post -intervention  and follow -up measurements . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
Groups  Mean ( SD) 
 Post Follow  
Construal  3.90 (1.43)  3.33 (1.58) 
2.64 (1.79) Meditation  4.06 (1.49)  
   
40 
 
 
Figure 1.  Model of relationship s among Cognitive -behavioural Avoidance , Weight Loss, Self-
compassion and Mindfulness . 
Values presented are standardized regression coefficients. The value in parenthesi s represents the 
coefficient for the direct path.   
†p> .0 5; ***p< .001  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
.09*** 
(-.035***) .01† 
-.27*** 
Cognitive -Behavioural 
Avoidance  
Weight Loss  
Mindfulness  
-.27*** 
.11*** 
Self-Compassion  
-.006† 
41 
 
 
Figure 2. Model of relationship s among Negative Automatic Thoughts, Weight Loss, Self-
compassion and Mindfulness . 
Values presented are standardized regression coeffi cients. The value in the parenthesis  represents 
the coefficient for the direct path.   
†p> .05;**p< .01;***p< .001  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-.22*** 
.09*** 
Neg. Automatic Thoughts  
 Weight Loss  
Mindfulness  
-.31*** 
.10*** 
Self-Compassion  
(-.04***)  -.02† 
-.02** 
