Applying Theory across Settings, Behaviors and Populations:
Translational Challenges and Opportunities
Robin J. Mermelstein, Ph.D.  and
Institute for Health Research and Policy and Psychology Department, University of Illinois at
Chicago
Tracey A. Revenson, Ph.D.
The Graduate Center of the City University of New York
Abstract
Basic social psychological theories have much to contribute to our understanding of health
problems and health-related behaviors and may provide potential avenues for intervention
development. However, for these theories to have broader reach and applicability to the field of
health psychology, more work needs to be done in integrating contexts into these theories and
addressing more specifically their application across settings, behaviors, and populations. We
argue that integration of these theories into a broader multi-disciplinary and multi-level ecological
framework is needed to enhance their translation into real-world applications. To enhance this
translation, we make several recommendations, including breaking down silos between
disciplinary perspectives and enhancing bidirectional communication and translation; analyzing
boundary conditions of theories; expanding research approaches to move outside the laboratory
and maintain a focus on external validity; and conducting efficacy testing of theories with
meaningful, relevant endpoints.
Translating basic social-psychological theories to useful applications addressing health
problems is a major challenge. This challenge derives both from the complexity of the health
problems and from the methodological approaches often found in more traditional social
psychological research. Social psychological theories have much to contribute to our
understanding of disease mechanisms, health behaviors, and interventions to promote
healthy behaviors and to reduce health-compromising ones. Yet currently a large chasm
exists between the worlds of basic social psychological research methods and the real-world
context of health problems and health behaviors. The papers in this special series provide the
first step in bringing closer these parallel research endeavors with the hope of forging
greater intersections. To strengthen the bridge between these two research communities, we
need to consider the integration of context into basic theories and to address more
specifically their applicability across settings, behaviors, and populations. Contextualizing
theory and research approaches is an important step in helping to make substantial progress
in addressing the health problems faced by our society today.
Wicked problems and the need for a contextual approach
The health problems that we grapple with today are complex ones, influenced by a
constellation of intersecting biological, behavioral, psychological, cultural and social-
structural factors. They are, as Kreuter, DeRosa, Houze, and Baldwin (2004) note, ªwicked
Corresponding Author: Robin Mermelstein, Institute for Health Research and Policy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1747 W.
Roosevelt Rd., Suite 558, Chicago, IL 60608, robinm@uic.edu.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Psychol . 2013 May ; 32(5): 592±596. doi:10.1037/a0030582.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
problems,º or problems without neat and simple solutions. Problems in translation can arise
when the basic researcher treats these issues, such as heart disease, cancer, diabetes, health
disparities, or their associated health risk behaviors, as if they were ªtame problemsº, or
ones that can be clearly delineated and solved by experts using approaches within their own
disciplines. Rather, as Kreuter et al. note, a multidisciplinary, systems perspective is more
appropriate to address wicked problems and to consider how these health problems are
enmeshed in their cultural, social, and economic structures.
Failures to translate research findings or findings of inconsistent results across studies may
well be due to a failure to consider context or moderators. Complex health problems are
often embedded within systems and cultures that bring their own challenges, with
intersecting behaviors and dynamic processes that change in relevance as the behavior and
health problem changes. Sociocultural context both influences and places constraints on
health behaviors, such as dietary practices, patient-physician communication, and acceptable
modes of coping. Removing health behaviors from their context may ultimately lead to
erroneous conclusions and failures to intervene successfully.
A key feature of complex behaviors or wicked problems is the consideration of an
ecological, multi-level systems perspective (Revenson & Pranikoff, 2005; Stokols, 1992).
Consider the problem of obesity in the United States today, and the notable significant
graded relationship between socio-economic status (SES) and obesity. Groups of lower SES
are at much greater risk for becoming obese (Sobal & Stunkard, 1989). This relationship is
not simply a function of poverty; the SES obesity gradient exists across multiple measures
and dimensions of SES (Wardle, Waller, & Jarvis, 2002). Although no single mechanism
can account for this SES-obesity gradient, one could easily hypothesize multiple
contributing factors at multiple levels of influence, including knowledge of nutrition and
food preparation options, cultural influences on food choices, neighborhood influences on
availability of food choices, exposure to stressful life circumstances that might lead one to
cope by eating high fat, calorie-dense, rewarding foods, family or relationship eating
patterns, or access to physical activity in a safe environment.
One particularly influential explanation of the SES-health gradient is Link and Phelan's
(1995) ªfundamental causeº theory which points to ªupstreamº social-environmental factors
that create negative outcomes. Link and Phelan highlight the importance of
ªcontextualizingº risk factors ± that is, the need to consider ultimate causes. Ignoring social
factors or exposures, Link and Phelan suggest, may lead to an over-emphasis on
individually-based intervention strategies or explanations that are ultimately ineffective at
achieving lasting health behavior change. For example, poverty is a fundamental cause of
multiple risk factors and disease outcomes. A recent review on the effects of poverty on
children's health and well-being points to both physical and social environmental
mechanisms that link poverty to poor health outcomes, including substandard housing,
crowding, and chaotic and under-budgeted schools (Evans & Kim, 2007).
Neither should we ignore the more downstream individual-level mechanisms that are more
proximal to health behaviors and health outcomes. The five papers in this series bring
attention to individual-level mechanisms that have promise for integration within a multi-
level framework. However, in order to maximize their utility, we need to start to place these
theories within the contexts of more complex, multilevel pathways to health. Bi-directional
integration, moving up from individual level factors to broader contextual ones, and moving
down from the broad, macro-level societal contexts requires researchers to work across
disciplinary boundaries and is imperative for making greater advances in improving health
(Anderson, 1998).Mermelstein and Revenson Page 2
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Considering context helps us to address several key questions that will facilitate the
translation of these theories into application. What are the conditions under which these
proposed mechanisms are most related to disease or to health behaviors? What are the
boundaries of each of these theories? Are there populations, settings, or behaviors for which
these processes are more or less influential or effective? These key questions address the
generalizability or the external validity of these theories and research findings and are
essential in helping to determine how translatable these theories are to health care.
Moving beyond “proof of principle” and bringing context into health
research
The papers in this series primarily present ªproof of principleº studies. That is, they
emphasize studies that are designed to detect whether a specific manipulation, often in
controlled laboratory conditions, yields an effect on a relevant construct of interest. They
provide the building blocks from which health researchers can frame studies, but the
challenge is in translating them beyond the proof of principle stage to clinically meaningful
and disseminable interventions. For example, in their review of nonconscious processes and
health, Sheeran, Gollwitzer, and Bargh (this issue), cite evidence that implicit attitude
measures show an association with health behaviors beyond those explained by explicit
cognitions, and that certain types of training manipulations may alter implicit cognitions. At
the same time, the authors note that there is a large variability in effect sizes across studies.
Could this variation be explained by differences in contexts or populations or behaviors?
Are there certain conditions under which implicit cognitions are more likely to influence
health-related behaviors?
Context, or specific settings and situations, may place individuals more at risk to the
influence of nonconscious processes. McKirnan, Ostrow, and Hope (1996) have proposed,
for example, that substance use and highly stimulating sexual settings may promote
cognitive disengagement, leading individuals to rely on more ªautomatic scriptsº or
nonconscious processes to respond to external pressures toward sexual risk. Partying or
celebrating with friends who smoke when one is trying to quit is yet another risky situation
that may make one vulnerable to nonconscious processes. Although in principle, it is easy to
acknowledge that nonconscious goal pursuits may well get in the way of maintaining
healthy intentions, we do not have evidence for the mediating mechanisms that would be the
targets of interventions.
We want to encourage researchers to think beyond the ªproof of principleº stage.
Researchers need to start to address the boundaries of these theories: under what conditions
do these mechanisms hold and how do they interact with mechanisms at different levels of
analysis (Anderson, 1998)? How do nonconscious processes fit in, for example, with
environmental conditions? Sheeran et al. provide some provocative examples of how
environmental manipulations, such as exposure to advertising and marketing, can trigger
nonconscious processes and influence health behaviors such as eating or physical activity.
Such policy or environmental message interventions have the potential for broader
applicability than the more intensive, individualized interventions that require significant
training and professional time.
A recent study by Cooper and colleagues (Cooper, Roter, Carson, et al., 2012) provides an
excellent example of moving beyond lab-based proof of principle studies into real world
settings to demonstrate the phenomenon of ªnonconscious processesº in health care settings.
Cooper et al. examined the associations of clinicians' implicit attitudes about race with
audiotaped measures of patient communication and patient ratings of care, thus marrying the
rigor of lab-based methods with real world contexts. Their study is noteworthy forMermelstein and Revenson Page 3
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
demonstrating that both implicit bias and stereotyping are associated with directly observed
medical visit communication and patient perceptions of care. Clinicians responded
automatically based on their implicit beliefs, and these beliefs may have influenced their
health care delivery. These findings, benefitting from the leads from basic social
psychological theories, may translate into intervention strategies to help reduce health
disparities in the patient-clinician health encounter.
Explaining and overcoming health disparities, or differences in the incidence, prevalence,
mortality, and burden of adverse health conditions across specific population groups is one
of the biggest challenges facing the health of our nation today. Major, Dovidio, and Berry-
Mendes (this issue) address the issue of health disparities by examining intergroup
relationships and highlight the importance of context. They note the value of being sensitive
to how behaviors may be ªin groupº defining, and the need to be cautious in cultural
tailoring of health promotion interventions when unhealthy behaviors are identified with a
cultural group. For example, Major et al. discuss how nonwhite minority groups may view
health promoting behaviors as characteristic of the white middle class, and unhealthy
behaviors (such as smoking or fast food consumption) as in-group defining. The authors cite
a study by Jackson et al. (2010) which suggests that engaging in health-compromising
behaviors like smoking, eating high fat diets, and drinking, may be coping mechanisms for
Blacks who are exposed to racism and stressful environments and may protect against
depression. This implies that there are both positive and negative consequences to engaging
in these behaviors, and the value on their expected outcomes may vary by cultural group.
The Jackson et al. study underscores the importance of taking into account diverse cultural
lenses as we examine whether these theories hold up across populations.
In considering how the theories presented in this series translate across groups and settings,
we might also remember that these theories tend to be grounded within Western, and mostly
Caucasian, cultural beliefs (Landrine & Klonoff, 1992), not only in how specific health-
related behaviors are valued, but also by privileging the perspective that individuals have
primary control over their behavior and health. These theories emphasize individualism, and
may operate differently in cultures where family and community are more central to health
behaviors.
The emphasis on individualism is a central component of self-regulation theory. The
likelihood of success with self-control, however, depends on multiple factors, operating
simultaneously, and with many of these factors outside of the individual's control. Self-
control strategies often depend on the availability of resources in the environment for
alternative coping strategies. Environments can moderate both the likelihood and success of
self-control strategies. Consider the case of two individuals who want to adopt a healthy,
low-fat diet high in fruits and vegetables. One lives in an upper middle class neighborhood
with several types of grocery stores along with a weekly farmers' market and multiple
restaurant options. The other lives in an urban ªfood desertº, with small corner markets,
limited food choices, and relatively high prices for fresh produce. Restaurant options are
limited to inexpensive, fast food venues. Settings play an important role in self-control, and
control over one's environment is not always feasible.
Studies of self-regulation processes are also now ripe to move out of the lab and into the
field and real world contexts. In their paper on self-regulation Mann et al. (this issue) discuss
the importance of motivational resources in inhibiting urges for unhealthy behaviors.
Laboratory-based studies have found that situational factors may enhance motivation or
reduce the depletion of resources -- two key factors in maintenance of health behavior
change. These laboratory-based studies offer hope for overcoming this depletion of
motivational resources so commonly found in struggles to change unhealthy behaviors, butMermelstein and Revenson Page 4
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
how these situationally specific manipulations translate into interventions that are broadly
sustainable remains largely untested. The challenge for researchers will be to work together
to build dynamic, longitudinal models of these self-regulation processes that better map onto
the daily fluctuations in motivation and coping resources and that provide adaptive feedback
in real world settings.
Fortunately, health behavior change researchers have done a good job of considering
multiple contextual variables and differences in settings and populations in implementing
interventions and translating evidenced based health research into practice. Self-regulatory
processes and theories have been at the core of most effective health behavior interventions
across the age span and provide good examples of translational research. Two recent studies
show the value of considering self-regulatory processes in intervention design and
implementation. McAuley and colleagues (2011) examined self-regulatory processes and
sustained exercise behavior in older adults and found that higher levels of executive
functions and the use of self-regulatory strategies (e.g., self-monitoring, goal setting, time
management) at the start of the exercise program enhanced self-efficacy, which in turn, lead
to greater exercise adherence. This study was notable in its use of community-dwelling older
adults as participants. Wilson and colleagues (Wilson et al., 2011) demonstrated the efficacy
of an intervention based on self-determination theory and social cognitive theory to increase
moderate to vigorous physical activity in low-income, minority adolescents. The
intervention significantly increased physical activity in the school setting in which the
program was delivered, but not outside of school. Why? Barriers in the students' home
environment made it difficult for them to continue to engage in physical activity outside of
school. These two exemplary studies are impressive in their translation of theory-based
interventions to real-world settings with challenging populations; they also are impressive in
helping to point out the need to go beyond self-regulatory skill training in generalizing
intervention effects across settings and environments.
Interpersonal influences on health move up a level of influence beyond the individual.
Pietromonaco, Uchino, and Dunkel-Schetter (this issue) acknowledge the broader
interpersonal influences that my influence health, such as the importance of social network
characteristics. But they also remind health researchers that there are multiple dimensions to
understanding social influence processes beyond the well studied constructs of social
support, relationship quality or social capital. Their focus on attachment provides a
thoughtful stretch for health behavior researchers, and may provide some new insights into
understanding conflicting findings in the field. The health literature is replete with studies
where strong correlational findings between, for example, social support and health behavior
change, fail to translate to effective interventions, and more nuanced theory, accounting for
context is needed (Westmaas, Bontemp-Jones, & Bauer, 2010). It may also be possible,
though, that the inconsistent findings about social influence processes and support
interventions reflect the presence of individual moderator variables. Attachment-related
characteristics may be an important factor for health behavior researchers to consider in
developing more tailored and individualized interventions.
The links between close relationships and health may well be universal, and important
relationships can provide leverage points for health behavior interventions. Indeed, there is a
substantial empirical literature linking interpersonal relationships to health outcomes, as well
as interventions to enhance intimate relationships that lead to positive health outcomes
(Wills & Ainette, 2012). Pietromonaco, et al. also note that transferring relationship science
theory to understudied populations and contexts will take skill and sensitivity, and may well
be challenging. We know relatively little about how these theories translate across racial
groups, nontraditional family constellations, and by age.Mermelstein and Revenson Page 5
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Like the association between interpersonal processes and health, the links between emotions,
emotional regulation and health may also be universal, and these effects may be both direct
and indirect. As a cross-cutting theme, emotions cut across populations, settings, and
behaviors. DeSteno, Kubzansky, and Gross (this issue) do a nice job of considering the
broader perspective of how emotions and emotional regulation intersect with broader
theoretical perspectives, as well as the need to examine multiple processes simultaneously
and not in isolation. These authors also argue appropriately for the need to move beyond a
main effects approach to examining the theoretical constructs and health outcomes. Indeed,
the issue of generalizability across settings, populations, and behaviors can be addressed
best through examinations of contextual moderators and not just main effects.
Emotional expression and regulation is also an area in which population differences may be
strong. DeSteno, Kubzansky and Gross (this series) suggest that there may be critical
periods during which the link between emotion and health is most powerful and advocate for
a life-span perspective in moving this line of research forward. We whole-heartedly endorse
the importance of a developmental perspective in understanding each of these proposed
theoretical mechanisms. We'd also like to add the importance of layering that life-span
approach within cultural, political and economic contexts. Affective expression likely varies
across the lifespan, as well as across cultures, and historical events may further shape these
processes across cohorts. DeSteno, et al. cite research suggesting that ªdisclosure of strong
emotional feelings can improve health outcomes by avoiding the cumulative stress of
inhibition.º One wonders, though, whether this is a western or American view about
emotional expression. Would similar findings hold in cultures where emotional
expressiveness is socially less acceptable?
Challenges and Opportunities
Move beyond silos
The complexity of health problems today means that no one mechanism or theory can
explain the broad array of predisposing factors, expression of behaviors, or influences on
health behavior change. The papers in this series provide an excellent introduction to classic
social psychological theories as they stand on their own. They have great potential for a new
growth spurt in health psychology. The next challenge for social psychologists will be to
consider the intersection of their work to theories, paradigms and frameworks in health
psychology. Progress in moving these theories into broader consideration beyond the
traditional social-psychological domain will occur more readily when linkages are made
across levels of analysis, behaviors, settings and populations, using an ecological
perspective, and when researchers more explicitly tackle the question of how these processes
relate to each other.
Although a focus on individual, intra-individual level processes has an important role in
understanding health problems, we also need to consider when such a focus on intra-
individual level processes is not sufficient and when we need to consider how these
processes operate in the context of social and environmental influences. As Anderson has
described (1998), this is not only about including multiple levels of analysis, or looking at
multiple influences within level, but also examining the mutual influences between levels of
analysis. One methodological challenge is to consider how individual-level data are nested
within larger contexts and populations. Individuals occupy all levels simultaneously, and
individual level data still reflect reference points within the broader ecological contexts.
There is often a tension between the appeal of universality of theories and the need to
acknowledge subgroup differences. Many aspects of context ±for example, demographic
variables that serve as proxies for access to health care and shape beliefs, coping strategiesMermelstein and Revenson Page 6
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
and availability of social capital ± can completely change the phenomenon of interest. It is
useful to remember that theories devoid of contextual factors likely privilege those in
majority groups, and, thus, may be incomplete models for understanding health behavior
processes in non-majority groups. We need to test directly the applicability of these theories
across populations. Including contextual factors in studies of basic social psychological
processes that shape health behavior will enhance scientific progress in health psychology
and translation to practice and policy.
Analyze boundary conditions
The question of applicability of theory across populations, settings, contexts, and behaviors
requires specific tests of generalizability and external validity. The field should encourage
and support rigorous replication across diverse samples, contexts, and problems (Ioannidis,
2006). Rigorous replication addressing boundaries should not be of lesser importance than
new discovery. It is also important that ªprovenº interventions not only be replicated, but
also tailored to different populations. Culture influences research at each state of the
research process so that the basic constructs underlying an intervention or measures of them
may not be relevant to a particular population.
Move outside the lab and maintain a focus on external validity
Perhaps our strongest recommendation is to encourage investigators to conduct research in
real world, real time contexts. Nearly two and a half decades ago, Adler, Taylor, &
Wortman (1987) pressed for the conduct of what they termed ªbasic field researchº in health
psychology ± theoretically inspired work conducted in the field as well as in the laboratory
that was oriented toward the elucidation of real-world problems. Their guidance is still
applicable today, and we similarly urge greater collaborations across boundaries to ensure
better the translational potential of the basic research.
Laboratory-based experiments are useful as initial ªproof of principleº or preliminary first
steps. Much of the research cited by the authors in this series of papers has been strong on
internal validity. Lack of attention to external validity may limit the application of these
theories. An emphasis on external validity adds credibility, increases the weight of the
evidence, and promotes translation further along the continuum. Rigorous theory testing
occurs not in tightly controlled contexts, but rather in imperfect settings (Green & Glasgow,
2006).
Conduct efficacy testing with meaningful, relevant endpoints
Much of the research cited by the authors of papers in this series has relied on laboratory-
based experiments with artificial timelines and outcome measures that may not have strong
construct validity. The study designs are often time-limited, and as a result, researchers often
rely on questionable proxies for the ultimate outcomes of interest. For example, many
studies end with self-reported behavioral intentions rather than the initiation or maintenance
of the behavior. We encourage researchers to apply their theories to relevant health
problems, populations, and outcomes.
Summary
Basic social psychological theories have much to offer health researchers. But we need to
increase credibility, replication across populations, settings, and behaviors, and translation.
Translational research comes with risks as well as great rewards. With good proof of
principle in hand, researchers can move forward to apply their theories to health problems ±
but both the initial tests and applications need to move into real world contexts and
behaviors. By understanding the context in which health behavior processes occur ± even ifMermelstein and Revenson Page 7
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
it creates conceptually complex models that cannot be tested in a single study ± we move the
science forward. Not every study can or should measure all relevant contextual factors, but
researchers can start to theorize about how contexts may aid in the interpretation or
understanding of the limits of their findings. Translation and considering context are the
responsibility of all researchers, both basic and applied, social and health. Our goal is to use
the best science possible, conceptually and methodologically, marrying what we learn from
social psychological theories with the realities and generalizability of broader health
domains, in order to build more effective interventions and achieve a deeper understanding
of complex health problems. We don't want to let our strong basic science get lost in
translation.
Acknowledgments
Work on this paper was supported in part by the University of Illinois Center for Clinical and Translational
Sciences grant number UL1RR029879.
References
Adler, NE.; Taylor, SE.; Wortman, CB. Basic field research in health psychology. In: Stone, GC., et
al., editors. Health Psychology: A Discipline and a Profession. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press; 1987. p. 91-118.
Anderson NB. Levels of analysis in health science: A framework for integrating sociobehavioral and
biomedical research. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 1998; 840:563±576. [PubMed:
9629283]
Cooper LA, Roter DL, Carson KA, Beach MC, Sabin JA, Greenwald GA, Inui TS. The associations of
clinicians' implicit attitudes about race with medical visit communication and patient ratings of
interpersonal care. American Journal of Public Health. 2012; 102:979±987. [PubMed: 22420787]
Evans GW, Kim P. Childhood poverty and health: Cumulative risk exposure and stress dysregulation.
Psychological Science. 2007; 18:953±957. [PubMed: 17958708]
Green LW, Glasgow RE. Evaluating the relevance, generalization, and applicability of research.
Evaluation & The Health Professions. 2006; 29:126±153.
Jackson PB, Williams DR, Stein DJ, Herman A, Williams SL, Redmond DL. Race and psychological
distress: The South African Stress and Health Study. Journal of Health and Social Behavior. 2010;
51:458±477. [PubMed: 21131621]
Ioannidis J. Evolution and translation of research findings: From bench to where? PLOS Clinical
Trials. 2006; E36:0001±0005.
Kreuter MW, DeRosa C, Howse EH, Baldwin GT. Understanding wicked problems: A key to
advancing environmental health promotion. Health Education & Behavior. 2004; 31:441±454.
[PubMed: 15296628]
Landrine H, Klonoff EA. Culture and health-related schemas: A review and proposal for
interdisciplinary integration. Health Psychology. 1992; 11:267±276. [PubMed: 1396496]
Link BG, Phelan J. Social conditions as fundamental causes of disease. Journal of Health and Social
Behavior. 1995; 36:80±94. [PubMed: 7560851]
McCauley E, Mullen SP, Szabo A, White S, Wojcicki TR, Mailey E, Gothe N, Olson E, Voss M,
Erickson K, Prakash R, Kramer A. Self-regulatory processes and exercise adherence in older
adults: Executive function and self-efficacy effects. American Journal of Preventive Medicine.
2011; 41:284±290. [PubMed: 21855742]
McKirnan DJ, Ostrow DG, Hope B. Sex, drugs, and escape: a psychological model of HIV-risk sexual
behaviors. AIDS Care. 1996; 8:655±669. [PubMed: 8993716]
Price, RH. Risky situations. In: Magnusson, D., editor. Toward a psychology of situations: An
interactional perspective. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1980. p. 103-112.
Revenson TA, Pranikoff JR. A contextual approach to treatment decision making in long-term breast
cancer survivorship. Health Psychology. 2005; 24(Supplement):593±598.Mermelstein and Revenson Page 8
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Sobal J, Stunkard AJ. Socioeconomic status and obesity: a review of the literature. Psychological
Bulletin. 1989; 105:260±275. [PubMed: 2648443]
Stokols D. Establishing and maintaining healthy environments: Toward a social ecology of health
promotion. American Psychologist. 1992; 47:6±22. [PubMed: 1539925]
Taylor SE, Seeman TE, Eisenberger JI, Kozanian TA, Moore AN, Moons WG. Effects of a supportive
or unsupportive audience on biological and psychological responses to stress. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology. 2010; 98:47±56. [PubMed: 20053030]
Wardle J, Waller J, Jarvis M. Sex differences in the association between socioeconomic status and
obesity. American Journal of Public Health. 2002; 92:1299±1304. [PubMed: 12144988]
Westmaas L, Bontemp-Jones J, Bauer JE. Social support in smoking cessation: Reconciling theory and
evidence. Nicotine and Tobacco Research. 2010; 12:695±707. [PubMed: 20513695]
Wills, T.; Ainette, MG. Social networks and social support. In: Baum, A.; Revenson, TA.; Singer, JE.,
editors. Handbook of Health Psychology. 2. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2012. p. 463-490.
Wilson DK, Van Horn ML, Kitzman-Ulrich H, Saunders R, Pate R, Lawman HG, Hutto B, Griffin S,
Zarrett N, Addy C, Mansard L, Mixon G, Brown P. Results of the ªActive by Choice Todayº
(ACT) randomized trial for increasing physical activity in low-income and minority adolescents.
Health Psychology. 2011; 30:463±471. [PubMed: 21534677]Mermelstein and Revenson Page 9
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2014 May 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
