 
 
 
Acyclic Behavior Change Diagrams:  
A Tool to Report and Analyze Interventions   
 
Gido Metz, Gjalt -Jorn Ygram Peters  & Rik Crutzen  
 
 
 
 
 
This document is the full text of "Acyclic Behavior  Change Diagrams: A Tool to Report and 
Analyze Interventions ", a manuscript that has been published  in Health Psychology and 
Behavioral Medicine . This is the preprint, located at https://psyarxiv.com/mzc4u/ . The 
Version of Record is also Open Access and available at https://doi.org/jp9t . Please cite this 
document as : 
 
Metz, G., Peters, G. -J. Y., & Crutzen, R. (2022). Acyclic Behavior Change Diagrams: A Tool to 
Report and Analyze Interventions . Health Psychology and Behavioral Medicine , 10, p. 
1216 -1228 . https://doi.org/jp9t  
 
This article describes the ABCD and ABCD matrix. Functionality to produce the ABCD is 
implemented in the behaviorchange R package (see its manual page ), in the online app at 
https://a -bc.eu/apps/abcd , and in the jamovi module behaviorchange . The Open Science 
Framework repositor y for this article is located at  https://osf.io/epbm4 . 
 
 
 
 

ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  1 
 
 
Acyclic Behavior Change Diagrams: A Tool to Report and Analyze Interventions  
 
Gido Metz,1 Gjalt -Jorn Ygram Peters,2 and Rik Crutzen1 
1Department of Health Promotion, Maastricht University/CAPHRI, The Netherlands  
2Department of Methods and Statistics, Faculty of Psychology, Open University of the 
Netherlands, Heerlen, The Netherlands  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Word count: 3857  
 
 
Author Note  
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Gido Metz, Department of 
Health Promotion, Maastricht University/CAPHRI, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, The 
Netherlands. Email: g.metz@maastrichtuniversity.nl   
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  2 
Abstract  
Behavior change inter ventions have a vital role in enhancing human health and well -being. 
Nevertheless, concerns have been raised about suboptimal reporting of behavior change 
interventions, making analyses, replications, and intervention re -use hard or impossible to 
conduct. This paper introduces acyclic behavior change diagrams (ABCDs) to achieve more 
transparent development, evaluation, and reporting of behavior change interventions. ABCDs 
are a visual representation of the assumptions regarding causal -structural chains that  underlie 
putative active ingredients of behavior change interventions. These causal -structural chains link 
the behavior change principles that are applied in an intervention to the (determinants of) 
behavior targeted in that intervention. ABCDs are helpfu l in making implicit assumptions 
explicit and help communicate assumptions with team members and other stakeholders. 
Moreover, we believe they make evaluation easier, and their machine -readability allows for 
ABCDs to be imported directly into (systematic r eview) databases with negligible costs while 
disclosing complete and accurate data. Finally, the ABCD approach fits well with other 
initiatives to gain a deeper understanding and synthesis of literature on active intervention 
elements.  
Keywords: behavior change interventions, reproducibility, transparency, open science, 
systematic reviews  
  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  3 
 
Acyclic Behavior Change Diagrams: A Tool to Report and Analyze Interventions  
The overall majority of deaths worldwide are caused by human behaviors such as 
smoking and unhealthy food intake  (Ritchie & Roser, 2019) . These behaviors are a function of 
the people  enacting them and their environments (Lewin, 1936) . Considering all of these factors 
in the context of behavior change inevitably leads to complex interventions (Kelly & Barker, 
2016) . Unfortunately, there are no 6 (Cialdini, 2008)  or 93 (Michie et al., 2013)  ways to change 
behavio r directly  – rather, interventions  operate on parts of the human psyche (i.e., 
psychological constructs) that are conceptualized as determinants of behavior change (Crutzen 
& Peters, 2018) . Interventions usually target multiple determinants with multiple components 
and media, as well as agents at mul tiple socio -ecological levels (Craig e t al., 2008) . 
Given this inevitable complexity, great  responsibility for behavior change lies on 
researchers and practitioners to comprehensively document the assumptions and decisions 
underlying behavior change interventions. Unfortunately, concerns have been raised about 
suboptimal reporting of these complex multi -component behavior change interventions, 
making analys es, replication s or re -use of interventions hard or even impossible  (Albrecht et 
al., 2013; De Bruin et al., 2021; Kok & Mesters, 2011; Schaalma & Kok, 2009) . One example 
is a systematic analysis and meta -analysis on reporting quality of behavior change techniques 
(BCTs) for experimental and comparator groups in randomized trials of smoking cessation 
interventions  (Black et al., 2020; De Bruin et al., 2021) . After labor intensive  manual coding , it 
was shown that 65% of intervention BCTs and 74% of comparator BCTs were not reported .  
The recommendations made by the Workgroup for Intervention Development and 
Evaluation Research (WIDER) were an explicit push to open this black box of behavior change 
interventions  (Abraham et al., 2014) . The workgroup concluded that oftentimes, information 
about putative mechanisms by which interventions generate their effects , as well as descriptions 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  4 
of the design and implementation of interventions lacked sufficient detail. Suboptimal reporting 
often has its roots in the start of the intervention development process, and ultimately leads to 
interventions that cannot be replicated and generalized across contexts. Bearing in mind the 
four WIDER recommendation s (1. Standardized descriptions of intervention characteristics that  
allow accurate replication across context s, by 2. clarifying the change processes considered 
necessary to prompt a change in the specified behaviors, how the intervention design was 
infor med by theoretical considerations or models of causal or regulatory processes and what 
mechanism -based change techniques were included, 3. published in detailed behavior change 
intervention manuals at the same time as behavior change intervention evaluatio n reports, 4. 
also including details of any services or care provided to control groups, such as usual care), 
we introduce acyclic behavior change diagrams (ABCDs) as a n operational innovation  to help 
optimize transparent development and reporting of interventions. ABCDs should not be seen 
as an intervention planning framework on its own (e.g.,  Intervention Mapping) but rather as a 
complementary tool to such frameworks , visualizing the active c omponents of behavior change 
interventions. In this paper, we will  also outline the advantages of using ABCDs . Notably, o ne 
advantage is their machine -readability (or: computer -readability), meaning that ABCD matrices 
are in a format that can be processed automatically and can therefore be imported directly into 
a database without time -consuming manual coding of active components. This is expected to 
help future systematic review processes once ABCDs are used more widely in future 
interventions.  Since using  ABCDs require s insight into how an intervention works, we will 
start with a description of seven aspects of behavior (change) that together form the causal -
structural chain of an intervention.  
  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  5 
 
The causal -structural chain  
Target behavior and sub -behaviors   
Behavior can be seen as an umbrella term; a specific behavior that is targeted in an 
intervention typically comprises related but different sub -behaviors  (Crutzen & Peters, 2019) . 
For example, the target behavior of ‘having a healthy diet’ consists of sub -behaviors like 
‘buying healthy ingredients’, ‘cooking a healthy meal’, and ’declining offered snacks’. It is 
important to gain insight into these various sub -behaviors because  they often have different 
causes. For example, the psychological constructs that determine whether one ultimately 
engages in a behavior (the behavioral det erminants) can differ from behavior to behavior 
(Peters, 2014) . Acknowledging that healthy eating is important (which is part of attitude) might 
be relevant to buying healthy ingredients, while feeling capable of cooking a healthy meal 
(which is part of self -efficacy) might  be important for cooking a healthy meal, and the 
expectation that declining a snack is met with approval ( which is part of perceived norms) might 
be important for indeed declining that snack.  
 
Determinants and sub -determinants  
Changing the relevant behavioral determinants is what lies at the heart of behavior 
change  (Crutzen et al., 2017) . Here, determinants are defined as psychological constructs that  
are assumed to causally contribute to behavior performance. In the brief example above about 
having a healthy diet, relevant determinants that need to be changed would be attitude, self -
efficacy, and perceived norms. Behaviors can also be mostly habitual , or determined by self -
monitoring, or by risk perception, or any combination of these and dozens of other potential 
determinants.  Moreover, d eterminants can differ in the degree to which they are cognitive or 
affective or to which they are explicit or impl icit.  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  6 
Determinants are generic psychological constructs and  changing them requires 
changing the constituent sub -determinants. Sub -determinants are more specific constructs that 
have a structural or causal relationship with the overarching determinant, and by virtue of their 
higher specificity are sufficiently concrete to be targeted in an intervention (e.g., by means of 
text, speech,  images or video). In other words, theories that do not provide clear links from their 
more generic, abstract constructs (i.e., determinants), through lower -level variables (i.e., sub -
determinants), to a level of sufficient psychological specificity to ena ble interfacing with 
tangible aspects of reality, cannot be utili zed in behavior change interventions. Therefore, it is 
necessary to be specific about sub -determinants when applying a theory – or more broadly when 
developing an intervention – to target a s pecific behavior. In the healthy diet example, an 
intervention does not target attitude or self -efficacy directly, but those sub -determinants that 
cover specific aspects of human psychology captured by these determinants instead . For 
example : behavioral be liefs regarding the consequences of buying healthy ingredients (which 
are part of attitude) , and control beliefs regarding specific capabilities to cook a healthy meal 
(which are part of self -efficacy). Like determinants, which sub -determinants are relevan t differs 
from behavior to behavior and from population to population. For example, beliefs regarding 
the price of healthy ingredients may be more relevant in lower -income populations than in 
higher -income populations, even if attitude in general is a relevant determinant in both 
populations. In that case, it is the relevance of the sub-determinant s underlying attitude that 
differs between populations.  
Behavior change principles, practical applications, and conditions for effectiveness  
Changes in sub -determinants and determinants involve learning. Crutzen and Peters (2018)  
explain  which learning principles humans acquired throughout their evolution and how these 
evolutionary learning processes are used to establish behavior change. These learning processes 
are very rudimentary, and behavior change  research  often instead concerns higher level 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  7 
behavior change principles (BCPs), termed ‘manipulations ’ in experimental psychology, and 
‘behavior change methods ’ (Bartho lomew et al., 1998; Kok et al., 2016)  or ‘behavior change 
techniques ’ (Abraham & Michie, 2008; Michie et al., 2013)  in health psychology.   
BCPs are general descriptions of procedures that are able to change (sub)determinants 
by engaging evolutionary learning processes (Crutzen & Peters, 2018; Kok et al., 2016) . The 
choice which BCP to use is guided by which determinants need to be changed  as BCPs differ 
in the extent to which they are suitable to change specific determinants . Being theoretical 
principles, how BCPs manifest in real -life interventions can vary considerably: the same BCP 
can be used in flyers, movies, counseling protocols, or website modules. For example, the BCP 
‘modeling’ may be used to show step by step demonst rations on how to easily cook a healthy 
meal (and thereby targeting self -efficacy) . Nevertheless,  it can also be used to demonstrate 
declining an offered snack, or how to ask for consent in a romantic situation (which thereby 
also targets self -efficacy). B CPs are, however, only effective in engaging evolutionary learning 
processes when the conditions for effectiveness (also known as parameters for use) are taken 
into account. For ‘modeling’, one of the conditions is that the receiver of the intervention 
identifies with the model and a coping model is used instead of a mastery model (Kok et al., 
2016) . To conclude, regardless of an intervention’s form , it is important to design these  practical 
applications according to the definitions and parameters of the implemented BCPs to secure 
successful engagement of th e underlying learning processes.  
The ABCD and ABCD matrix  
By describing the seven aspects of behavior change (target behavior, sub -behaviors, 
determinants, sub -determinants, applications, conditions for effectiveness and behavior change 
principles) we have defined the causal -structural chain underlying behavior change 
interventions  (Crutzen & Pe ters, 2019) . Such chains show what an intervention entails and how 
it is hypothesized to lead to behavior change in terms of both causal (what influences what) and 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  8 
structural (what consists of what) terms. Every chain is self -sustaining: it always contains 
exactly seven links from behavior change principle through sub -determinants to target 
behavior. This means that if any of the seven links is broken, the intervention developer’s 
assumptions no longer provide a reason to assume that that specific c hain will contribute to 
behavior change. A typical intervention often contains a multitude of such chains. On the one 
hand, this complexity or ‘high cumulative dose’ is advantageous ; the more causal -structural 
chains an intervention consists of, the lower the impact of one or two faulty links. However, at 
the same time, the plethora of assumptions and information to document and keep track of can 
cause intervention developers and stakeholders to be overwhelmed when developing and 
reporting interventions. Th erefore, in this article, we propose and show the potential of the use 
of Acyclic Behavior Change Diagrams (ABCDs). They are a visual representation of all causal -
structural chains that express a set of important assumptions as to why and how an interventi on 
would achieve behavior change. ABCDs are produced from ABCD matrices, which are 
machine -readable representations of those assumptions in a spreadsheet format. ABCDs show 
at a glance which causal -structural relationships underlie an intervention . Therefo re, we expect 
ABCDs to contribut e to the development and reporting of interventions in a transparent manner.  
Example   
Van Stralen et al. (2008 ) report how they developed, implemented and evaluated a 
program to motivate older adults to initiate and maintain physical activity with  the Intervention 
Mapping protocol. (Active plus; recognized as a ‘theoretically sound’ intervention in the Dutch 
recognition system for health promotion interventions; Brug et al., 2010 ). Based on this 
description, we created an ABCD matrix  and ABCD, thereby illustrating how ABCDs can be 
of use to report interventions in a clear, concise, and consistent manner . To ensure rightful 
representation, t he corresponding author of Van Stralen et al. (2008 ) was contacted to examine  
whether our ABCD reflected the part  of the intervention that they described. This part, and 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  9 
therefore the focus of the ABCD matrix  and ABCD, is the target behavior of initiating physical 
activity. Note that  the same logic applies to other possible target behaviors of the at -risk group 
(e.g., maintaining physical activity) as well as other environmental agents that might be targeted 
in an intervention (e.g., health professionals, policy makers). The target be havior of initiating 
physical behavior has been divided into three sub -behaviors: ‘older adults monitor their 
recreational physical activity level’, ‘older adults indicate reasons to be physically active as 
recreation’, and ‘older adults identify solutions  to take away the barriers to being physically 
active for recreation’ (note that these sub -behaviors are known as ‘performance objectives’ in 
the Intervention Mapping literature and the Active plus protocol;  Bartholomew et al., 1998; 
Van Stralen et al., 2008) . For the second sub -behavior, two sub-determinants were selected: 
‘older adults list the personally relevant benefits of being sufficiently active’, and ‘older adults 
express a positive attitude about being sufficiently active’, falling under the determinants of 
awareness and attitude, respectively. Then, the behavior change principle ‘ self-monitoring ’ was 
used to create a practical application for the first sub -determinant in the form of ‘ self-complete  
logbooks to monitor own physical activity behavior in last week’ based on w hich rewarding 
feedback was given, taking into account the conditions for effectiveness that ‘the monitoring 
must be of the specific behavior (i.e., not of the physiological state or health outcome). The data 
must be interpreted and used. The reward must b e reinforcing to the individual’. The second 
sub-determinant, ‘tailored feedback and argumentation’ has been used to create the practical 
application of ‘computer tailored feedback in text on perceived positive and negative 
consequences of physical activit y. New arguments to change opinions are provided in text’, 
taking into account the conditions for effectiveness ‘Feedback needs to be individual, follow 
the behavior in time, and be specific’.   
We only described two causal -structural pathways in the previo us paragraphs, but it 
might have become clear already that such an intervention description  is not ideal in terms of  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  10 
clarity and readability. ABCD matrices offer a standardized and machine -readable way to 
include this information. While we recommend publishing such matrices in machine -readable 
format (comma separated files, .csv, OpenDocument files, .ods, or Office Open XML, .xlsx ; 
the benefit of this is explained in the next section ), as an illustration we include an excerpt in 
Table 1.   
While the ABCD matrix  is optimized to be read  by machines, the ABCD that can be 
produced from it is however human -readable. It clearly visualizes the seven columns of the 
ABCD matrix , thereby providing a clear overview of all relations and underlying assumptions 
of the intervention (Figure 1). All cells with the same content are merged to be represented by 
the same element, with the only exception being the determinants. They are only merged within 
the corresponding sub -behaviors since determinants that determine different sub -behaviors may 
be labeled as the same psychological construct (e.g., attitude) but repre sent different aspects of 
human psychology in reality (Crutzen & Peters, 2019) .
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  11 
Table 1        
ABCD matrix  of two of the causal -structural  chains comprising  Active plus.   
Behavior  
change 
principles  Conditions for effectiveness  Applications  Sub-determinants 
(change objectives)  Determinants  Sub-behaviors 
(performance 
objectives)  Target 
behavior  
Self-
monitoring  The monitoring must be of the 
specific behavior (i.e., not of 
the physiological state or health 
outcome). The data must be 
interpreted and used. The 
reward must be reinforcing to 
the individual.  Self-complete logbooks to 
monitor own physica l activity 
behavior in last week.  Older adults list the 
personally relevant 
benefits of being 
sufficiently active  Awareness  Older adults 
indicate reasons 
to be physically 
active as 
recreation  Initiate 
recreational 
physical 
activity  
Tailored 
feedback and 
argumentation  Feedback needs to be 
individual, follow the behavior 
in time, and be specific.  Computer -tailored feedback 
in text on perceived positive 
and negative consequences of 
physical activity. New 
arguments to change opinions 
are provided in text.  Older adults express 
a positive attitude 
about being 
sufficiently active  Attitude  Older adults 
indicate reasons 
to be physically 
active as 
recreation  Initiate 
recreational 
physical 
activity  
Note . The entire ABCD matrix  can be found in the Open Science Framework repository at https://osf.io/epbm4/  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  12 
 
 
Figure 1: ABCD for (parts of) the intervention Active plus (Van Stralen et al., 2008) .  
The dashed boxes and red lines represent the pathways that were discussed in the text.  
Note . Each box represents one of the seven columns in the ABCD matrix . The lines with the 
fork-shaped ends in between behavior change principles and application stand for ‘implemented 
in’. Applications are manifest constructs and hav e, in the tradition of drawing pathways in 
structural equation modeling (SEM;  Stein et al., 2012 ), been placed in rectangles. In turn, t he 
determinants have been placed in ovals as they are latent constructs (again in the tradition of 
SEM). The lines with three types of arrowheads represent three relationship types: regular 
arrowheads represent causal relationships, points represent struct ural relationships, and forks 
represent that applications implement a BCP. The shape of the boxes for sub -determinants has 
been chosen to distinguish them from the rest, as they are less likely to be conceptualized as a 
latent construct on their own, inste ad being closer to what in SEM is called an indicator.  
  

ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  13 
Why?  
As previously mentioned, we believe that ABCDs are helpful in creating a clear and 
concise visualization of intervention s. Besides that, there are several other, related advantages, 
that we would like to address here. First, as ABCDs offer an overview of all elements and 
underlying assumptions of an intervention, they are helpful in making implicit assumptions 
explicit , and in checking whether all relevant (sub)determinants of behavior are ta rgeted or 
whether there are missing links. In this way, t hey help keep track of and manage the intricacies  
underlying complex interventions. Second, ABCDs facilitate reflecting on, discussing, and 
communicating the assumptions underlying an intervention. A clear visualization enables team 
members and other stakeholders, such as the executive intervention produ cers or target 
population members, to get a better grasp of the intervention and makes it possible to discuss 
those assumptions during the development stage and improve the intervention.   
Third, ABCDs support thorough intervention evaluation. Because ABCDs  explicitly list 
all psychological constructs that each intervention targets, they function as a blueprint outlining 
exactly what to measure in evaluations to identify  which parts of the intervention worked well 
and which would benefit from an update. Idea lly, an evaluation is designed to measure change 
in all sub -determinants, determinants, and sub -behaviors, so that it is clear which links may be 
responsible for broken chains. However, many situations are not ideal, and in such cases 
ABCDs can help justif y and document decisions as to which elements are included and omitted 
in an evaluation.  
Applying these advantages to the example of Van Stralen et al. (2008) , using ABCDs 
might have helped in specifying  intervention contents. For example, creating the ABCD 
revealed that the description of Active plus was not entirely complete in how the parameters for 
the BCP ‘ self-monitoring’ were applied in the intervention. This BCP requires that the ‘data 
must be int erpreted and used' but in our view, the description of the intervention did not 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  14 
elaborate on how this was done. Using ABCDs might also have been helpful in specifying  sub-
determinants into more concrete ones that allow for more targeted (and potentially mo re 
effective) intervention elements. For example, when discussing this ABCD with team members 
and stakeholders, the question could have arisen as to what exactly were the personally relevant 
benefits referred to in the sub -determinant ‘older adults list th e personally relevant benefits of 
being sufficiently active’. After all, developing an application communicating those benefits 
inevitably requires a concrete list. Based on this discussion, that sub -determinant could have 
been specified as: ‘older adults state that physical activity reduces the chance of cardiovascular 
disease’.   
The fourth benefit , briefly described  in the introduction section , concerns  the machine -
readability of the ABCD matrices underlying ABCDs. Human coding of the assumptions 
underlying an intervention based on publications, intervention manuals, and intervention 
content is error -prone, costly, and often yields incomplete descriptions (Albrecht et al., 2013; 
De Bruin et al., 2021; Kok & Mesters, 2011; Schaalma & Kok, 2009) . Although ABCD 
matrices do not cover all aspects of an intervention, they do cover a set of important basic 
assumptions (what does an intervention target and with what?), an d the benefit of this simplicity 
is that they are simple to use and do not require specific software. Since using ABCDs during 
the intervention design and development  stages  is beneficial on its own , the underlying ABCD 
matrix could be seen as an effort -free advantageous by -product by the time the intervention is 
completed.  Namely , there are no additional costs to transparently publish ing the causal -
structural chains that are assumed to underlie an intervention. In systematic reviews, the ABCD  
matrices  can then be imported directly into  database s with negligible  costs , whilst disclosing 
complete and accurate data . 
As a fifth benefit, we be lieve the ABCD approach fits well with other initiatives to gain 
a deeper understanding and synthesis of literature on active intervention elements. For example, 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  15 
over the past years, Michie et al. (2021)  have been working on the  behavior change intervention 
ontology; a  database  using artificial intelligence  that will contain detailed information on active 
ingredients of behavior change interventions , being  able to provide intervention developers 
with insights on which elements ha ve been proven to be most effective in the past. So, when an 
intervention developer has collected elements based on their search in the ontology database, 
they will have to plan the intervention, either with the Intervention Mapping framework, the 
Behavior  Change Wheel or any other framework. Whichever framework is used, the ABCD 
will help the developer in visualizing the intervention and to get a clear understanding  of the 
(sometimes implicit) assumptions and causal -structural relations underlying the inte rvention. 
The intervention developer can then put the ABCD into their report, enabling  other s to get a 
clear picture  of that specific intervention. Of course, the findings from this report can also be 
integrated in the ontology, contributing to the insight s on active intervention ingredients on an 
aggregate level. At the level of a specific intervention, we believe that the use of ABCDs leads 
to more transparent reporting of the active ingredients of interventions.  
How?  
Creating an ABCD can be achieved in three ways, all using Free/Libre Open Source 
Software. First, the behaviorchange::abcd() function in the behaviorchange package can be used 
in R (i.e., using script). Second, Jamovi offers the behaviorchange module, whic h offers the 
possibility of simultaneously making an ABCD matrix  and an ABCD (i.e., using a point -and-
click interface). For an extensive explanation on how to create an ABCD with either R or 
Jamovi, please see  chapter 9 in the Book of Behavior Change (Crutzen & Peters, 2019) .  For 
now, we will focus exclusively on the third, and in our e yes, easiest  way of creating an ABCD: 
a web application that can be found on https://a -bc.eu/apps/abcd , and does not require any 
software  installation .  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  16 
The first step in creating an ABCD with the app is to specify an ABCD matrix . This can 
be done in the app itself, but we recommend using your preferred spreadsheet editor  (e.g., if 
working in a team, Google Sheets can be a convenient way to collaborate). In the app’s ‘data’ 
tab, the link to a Google Sheet can be pasted (if its sharing settings make it viewable with the 
link) , and the information can be directly imported. Alternatively, a spreadsheet can be 
uploaded in .xlsx or .csv format, or one can manually specify the ABCD matrix  in the app. 
ABCD matrices that are imported from Google Sheets or from an uploaded file will be  
transformed to a standardized ABCD matrix . At this point, it is still possible to edit the ABCD 
matrix  in the app. After the ABCD matrix  has been created, the second step is to click on the 
button labeled ‘generate plot’ , which  will turn the ABCD matrix  into an ABCD. The generated 
ABCD can be downloaded and saved in different formats. The SVG format, for example, can 
be useful when one wants to make changes to the ABCD’s appearance (e.g., adding color with 
Inkscape, like was done in Figure 1 for the paths that are described in more detail in the main 
text).   
Regarding  the specific contents of the ABCD  matrix, this article does not prescribe 
methods to identify (sub -)behaviors and (sub -)determinants or to select behavior change 
principles.  Being a generic tool, ABCDs can be used in the context of different intervention 
planning frameworks, each with their own ideas on how to engage in several planning aspects , 
for example regarding how to select and formulate (sub)determinants. Within the Intervention 
Mapping framework, behavior change methods are mapped on determinants, meaning that a 
suitable method is chosen b ased on the decision of which determinants need to be targeted  (Kok 
et al., 2016) .  BCTs , on the other hand, have b een mapped on mechanisms of action  (Carey et 
al., 2018; Connell et al., 2019) . So, when using ABCDs during development of an intervention 
using the Behavior Change Wheel, the names of the columns in the ABCD can be changed 
from ‘ behavior change method’ to ‘ behavior change technique’ and from ‘ determinant’ to 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  17 
‘mechanism of action’ and can then be used to get a clear overview of the intervention.  Another 
example is the use of Core Processes  – a helpful and systematic approach to answer questions 
relevant to problem definition and solution using expert knowledge, empirical evidence and 
theory, and collecting additional data (Ruiter & Crutzen, 2020) . This approach can also be used 
to answer planning questions such as “What are the determinants of X” (see, for example, 
(Nalukwago et al., 2018) . The identified determinants can then be used to complete the ABCD 
matrix.  
 
Anecdotal evidence  
First experiences with the use of ABCDs in systematic behavior change were gained 
both in research and in education and have been shown to be promising. (Bartholomew et al., 
2016)  used ABCDs in developin g a computer -based intervention to reduce sedentary behavior 
among office employees (please note that the appearance of the ABCD used in this paper is 
somewhat  different from the current lay -out, yet the underlying assumptions and elements are 
exactly the same). ABCDs have also been used in the context of  the evaluation of the Dutch 
sexual health website Sense .info (Metz et al., 2021) . The content of Sense .info’s chlamydia 
page was put in an ABCD to get a clear overview of all elements and how they were intended 
to be used to lead  to behavior change.   The subsequent evaluation of the actual use of the 
intervention benefited from the structure that the ABCD offered. In education, ABCDs were 
used in intervention design courses both in psychology and health science programs. Students 
used ABCDs when deve loping intervention ideas , and this helped them cover all relevant links 
of the causal -structural chain.   
Conclusion  
This paper introduced ABCDs in order to  achieve clearer and more transparent 
development, evaluation, and reporting of behavior change interventions. This is highly 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  18 
relevant given the oftentimes expressed concerns about suboptimal reporting of interventions. 
Although our examples were mainly de rived from research in health psychology and health 
promotion, we believe ABCDs can be used for behavior change interventions in general.   
 
Acknowledgements  
We would like to thank Luke McGuinness for coding the ABCD Shiny App , Maartje van 
Stralen for corroborating  the ABCD reflecting part of the Active plus intervention , and Lior 
Weinreich for proofreading the manuscript . 
 
Ethics Statement  
Ethics approval was not required as  this study is a description of a tool and no primary data 
collection has taken place .  
 
Disclosure of Interest  
The author s report no conflict of interest.  
 
Funding  
Gido Metz contributed to this paper while being supported by ZonMw  – the Netherlands 
Organization for Health Research and Development (project number: 555003022).  This 
funder did not have a role in the writing or approval of the manuscript. The other authors did 
not receive any financial support.  
 
Prior versions  
Preprint s of this article are available online at  https://psyarxiv.com/mzc4u/  
(https://doi.org/hrz4 ) 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  19 
 
Data, materials, and online resources  
The web application to create an ABCD can be found at https://a -bc.eu/apps/abcd  
The spreadsheet file containing the ABCD matrix  of Active plus can be found in the Open 
Science Framework repository at https://osf.io/epbm4/   
  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  20 
Reference s 
Abraham, C., Johnson, B. T., de Bruin, M., & Luszczynska, A. (2014). Enhancing Reporting 
of Behavior Change Intervention Evaluations. Journal of Acquired Immune 
Deficiency Syndrome s, 66(3), S293 –S299. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/QAI.0000000000000231  
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in 
interventions. Health Psychology , 27, 379 –387. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278 -
6133.27.3.379  
Albrecht, L., Arc hibald, M., Arseneau, D., & Scott, S. D. (2013). Development of a checklist 
to assess the quality of reporting of knowledge translation interventions using the 
Workgroup for Intervention Development and Evaluation Research (WIDER) 
recommendations. Implemen tation Science , 8(1), 52. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748 -
5908 -8-52 
Bartholomew, L. K., Parcel, G. S., & Kok, G. (1998). Intervention Mapping: A process for 
developing theory - and evidence -based health education programs. Health Education 
and Behavior , 25, 545–563. https://doi.org/10.1177/109019819802500502  
Berninger, N. M., ten Hoor, G. A., Plasqui, G., Kok, G., Peters, G. -J. Y., & Ruiter, R. A. C. 
(2020). Sedentary Work in Desk -Dominated Environments: A Data -Driven 
Intervention Using Intervention Mapping. JMIR Formative Research , 4(7), e14951. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/14951  
Black, N., Johnston, M., Michie, S., Hartmann‐Boyce, J., West, R., Viechtbauer, W., Eisma, 
M. C., Scott, C., & Bruin, M. (2020). Behaviour change techniques associated with 
smoking cessation in intervention and comparator groups of randomized controlled 
trials: A systematic review and meta‐regression. Addiction , 115(11), 2008 –2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/add.15056  
Brug, J., van Dale, D., Lanting, L., Kremers, S., Veenhof, C., Leurs, M., van Yperen, T., & 
Kok, G. (2010). Towards evidence -based, quality -controlled health promotion: The 
Dutch recognition system for health promotion interventions. Health Education 
Research , 25(6), 1100 –1106. https://doi.org/10.1093/her/cyq046  
Carey, R. N., Connell, L. E., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., de Bruin, M., Kelly, M. P. , & 
Michie, S. (2018). Behavior Change Techniques and Their Mechanisms of Action: A 
Synthesis of Links Described in Published Intervention Literature. Annals of 
Behavioral Medicine . https://doi.org/10.1093/abm/kay078  
Cialdini, R. B. (2008). Influence: Scie nce and Practice . Allyn & Bacon.  
Connell, L. E., Carey, R. N., de Bruin, M., Rothman, A. J., Johnston, M., Kelly, M. P., & 
Michie, S. (2019). Links Between Behavior Change Techniques and Mechanisms of 
Action: An Expert Consensus Study. Ann. Behav. Med. , 13. 
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew, M. (2008). 
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: The new Medical Research 
Council guidance. BMJ , a1655. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a1655  
Crutzen, R., & Peters, G. -J. Y. (2018). Evolutionary learning processes as the foundation for 
behaviour change. Health Psychology Review , 12(1), 43 –57. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2017.1362569  
Crutzen, R., & Peters, G. -J. Y. (2019). The Book of Behavior Change . 1, 72. 
https://do i.org/doi:10.5281/zenodo.3570967  
Crutzen, R., Peters, G. -J. Y., & Noijen, J. (2017). Using Confidence Interval -Based 
Estimation of Relevance to select social -cognitive determinants for behaviour change 
interventions. Frontiers in Public Health , 5, 165. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2017.00165  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  21 
De Bruin, M., Black, N., Javornik, N., Viechtbauer, W., Eisma, M. C., Hartman -Boyce, J., 
Williams, A. J., West, R., Michie, S., & Johnston, M. (2021). Underreporting of the 
active content of behavioural interventions: A systematic review and meta -analysis 
of randomised trials of smoking cessation interventions. Health Psychology Review , 
15(2), 195 –213. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1709098  
Kelly, M. P., & Barker, M. (2016). Why is changing health -related behavio ur so difficult? 
Public Health , 136, 109 –116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.puhe.2016.03.030  
Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., Peters, G. -J. Y., Mullen, P. D., Parcel, G. S., Ruiter, R. A. C., 
Fernández, M. E., Markham, C., & Bartholomew, L. K. (2016). A taxonomy of 
behavior change methods: An Intervention Mapping approach. Health Psychology 
Review , 10, 297 –312. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155  
Kok, G., & Mesters, I. (2011). Getting inside the black box of health promotion programmes 
using Intervention Map ping. Chronic Illness , 7(3), 176 –180. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1742395311403013  
Lewin, K. (1936). Principles of topological psychology . McGraw -Hill. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/10019 -000 
Metz, G., Roosjen, H., Zweers, W., & Crutzen, R. (2021). Evaluating use of web -based 
interventions: An example of a Dutch sexual health intervention. Health Promotion 
International . https://doi.org/10.1093/heapro/daab190  
Michie, S., Richardson, M., Johnsto n, M., Abraham, C., Francis, J., Hardeman, W., Eccles, 
M. P., Cane, J., & Wood, C. E. (2013). The Behavior Change Technique Taxonomy 
(v1) of 93 Hierarchically Clustered Techniques: Building an International Consensus 
for the Reporting of Behavior Change In terventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine , 
46(1), 81 –95. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160 -013-9486 -6 
Michie, S., West, R., Finnerty, A. N., Norris, E., Wright, A. J., Marques, M. M., Johnston, M., 
Kelly, M. P., Thomas, J., & Hastings, J. (2021). Representat ion of behaviour change 
interventions and their evaluation: Development of the Upper Level of the Behaviour 
Change Intervention Ontology [version 2; peer review: 2 approved]. Wellcome Open 
Research , 5(123). https://doi.org/10.12688/wellcomeopenres.15902.2  
Nalukwago, J., Alaii, J., van den Borne, B., Mukisa Bukuluki, P., & Crutzen, R. (2018). 
Application of Core Processes for Understanding Multiple Concurrent Sexual 
Partnerships Among Adolescents in Uganda. Frontiers in Public Health , 6, 13. 
Peters, G. -J. Y. (2014). A practical guide to effective behavior change: How to identify what 
to change in the first place. European Health Psychologist , 16(4), 142 –155. 
https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/hy7mj  
Ritchie, H., & Roser, M. (2019). Causes of death . Our World in Data. 
https://ourworldindata.org/causes -of-death  
Ruiter, R. A. C., & Crutzen, R. (2020). Core Processes: How to Use Evidence, Theories, and 
Research in Planning Behavior Change Interventions. Frontiers in Public Health , 8, 
8. 
Schaalma, H., &  Kok, G. (2009). Decoding health education interventions: The times are a -
changin’. Psychology & Health , 24(1), 5 –9. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/08870440801995802  
Stein, C. M., Morris, N. J., & Nock, N. L. (2012). Structural Equation Modeling. In R. C. 
Elston,  J. M. Satagopan, & S. Sun (Eds.), Statistical Human Genetics  (Vol. 850, pp. 
495–512). Humana Press. https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -1-61779 -555-8_27  
Van Stralen, M. M., Kok, G., de Vries, H., Mudde, A. N., Bolman, C., & Lechner, L. (2008). 
The Active plus pro tocol: Systematic development of two theory - and evidence -
based tailored physical activity interventions for the over -fifties. BMC Public Health , 
8(1), 399. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471 -2458 -8-399 
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  22 
 
Table 1        
ABCD matrix of two of the causal -structural  chains comprising  Active plus.   
Behavior 
change 
principles  Conditions for effectiveness  Applications  Sub-determinants 
(change objectives)  Determinants  Sub-behaviors 
(performance 
objectives)  Target 
behavior  
Self-
monitoring  The monitoring must be of the 
specific behavior (i.e., not of 
the physiological state or health 
outcome). The data must be 
interpreted and used. The 
reward must be reinforcing to 
the individual.  Self-complete logbooks to 
monitor own physica l activity 
behavior in last week.  Older adults list the 
personally relevant 
benefits of being 
sufficiently active  Awareness  Older adults 
indicate reasons 
to be physically 
active as 
recreation  Initiate 
recreational 
physical 
activity  
Tailored 
feedback and 
argumentation  Feedback needs to be 
individual, follow the behavior 
in time, and be specific.  Computer -tailored feedback 
in text on perceived positive 
and negative consequences of 
physical activity. New 
arguments to change opinions 
are provided in text.  Older adults express 
a positive attitude 
about being 
sufficiently active  Attitude  Older adults 
indicate reasons 
to be physically 
active as 
recreation  Initiate 
recreational 
physical 
activity  
Note . The entire ABCD matrix can be found in the Open Science Framework repository at https://osf.io/epbm4/  
ACYCLIC BEHAVIOR CHANGE DIAGRAMS  23 
 
 
 
Figure 1: ABCD for (parts of) the intervention Active plus (Van Stralen et al., 2008) .  
The dashed boxes and red lines represent the pathways that were discussed i n the text.  
Note . Each box represents one of the seven columns in the ABCD matrix. The lines with the 
fork-shaped ends in between behavior change principles and application stand for ‘implemented 
in’. Applications are manifest constructs and have, in the t radition of drawing pathways in 
structural equation modeling (SEM; Stein et al., 2012 ), been placed in rectangles. In turn, the 
determinants have been placed in ovals as they are latent constructs (again in the tradition of 
SEM). The lines with three types of arrowheads represent three relationship types: regular  
arrowheads represent causal relationships, points represent structural relationships, and forks 
represent that applications implement a BCP. The shape of the boxes for sub -determinants has 
been chosen to distinguish them from the rest, as they are less li kely to be conceptualized as a 
latent construct on their own, instead being closer to what in SEM is called an indicator.  

