COMMENTARY
Moving From Theory to Practice and Back in Social and
Health Psychology
Susan Michie and Robert West
University College LondonBonnie Spring
Northwestern University
Progressive advancement of interventions in health psychology requires improvements in underlying
theory. The theoretical advances described in this special issue offer a number of possibilities forintervention development. These include advances in understanding the role of cognitive biases, primingeffects, effective planning, the role of specific affective states, and the influence of attachment style onresponse to interventions. For these advances to translate into progressive improvements in interventionsand realized gains in public health, we propose that the theories should: (a) be explicitly linked to themajor theories from which they draw; (b) reflect the context sensitivity and dynamic nature of theintervention target; (c) show convincing evidence of improved effectiveness of interventions they spawnaccording to rigorous criteria; and (d) address the full translation process, including implementation byhealth care providers and engagement by the target population.
Keywords: theory, interventions, implementation, translation
Health psychology contributes to interventions to improve cur-
rent or future health, and to maximize functioning and minimizethe psychological distress caused by ill health. This can involvechanging affect or behavior in nonpatient and patient populations,health care professionals or policymakers, and funding agencies.For many decades, social and personality psychology (henceforth,referred to as social psychology ) has been developing theories that
are relevant to these targets. The reviews in this special issuereflect recent advances in these areas. This commentary addresseshow to translate theoretical perspectives exemplified by theseadvances into effective intervention strategies in clinical and pub-lic health practice.
We start by outlining what makes a good theory and describe
how progressive advancement in interventions (an “incrementaltechnology”) requires corresponding advances in theory. We thensuggest conditions needed to ensure that advances in theory trans-late into advances in intervention technology. We draw on thetheories presented in this special issue as illustration.What Makes a Good Theory?
The terms theory andmodel are often used interchangeably, and
this commentary will follow that practice. A theory is convention-ally defined as “a principle or body of interrelated principles thatpurports to explain or predict a number of interrelated phenomena”(VandenBos, 2006 , p. 934), whereas a model is “a graphic, theo-
retical, or other type of representation of a concept or of . . .processes that can be used for various investigative and demon-strative purposes, such as enhancing understanding of the concept,proposing hypotheses, showing relationships, or identifying epi-demiological patterns” ( VandenBos, 2006 , p. 586). Both theories
and models represent a conceptual summary of cumulative knowl-edge about an area. Hence, their appropriate application facilitatesfuture accumulation of evidence.
The domain of social psychological theory extends beyond
interindividual and group processes to areas of individual psychol-ogy relating to motivation, emotion, and what has been termedsocial cognition . A substantial body of its theory is relevant to
developing health psychology interventions. Although it is possi-ble to develop such interventions with some degree of effective-ness without the guidance of formal theory, such an approach isantithetical to progress. Without theory, one is continually playing“20 questions with nature” ( Newell, 1973 , p. 283).
Theories in any area of psychology can only be partial descrip-
tions of the complex interplay of events that occur. They areperceptions of the domain of interest and not reproductions of it.They describe aspects of the processes involved from a particularperspective and for a particular purpose. Thus, theories ultimatelyhave to be judged according to how well they serve their purpose.
Although a considerable body of theory has developed in rela-
tion to health behavior, functioning, and well-being, health gains
Susan Michie, Research Department of Clinical, Educational, and Health
Psychology, University College London, London, England; Robert West,Cancer Research UK Health Behaviour Research Centre, Department ofEpidemiology & Public Health, University College London; BonnieSpring, Department of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,Northwestern University.
We thank Jamie Brown, University College London, for providing astute
and helpful comments on a draft of the paper.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Susan
Michie, Research Department of Clinical, Educational, and Health Psy-chology, University College London, 1-19 Torrington Place, London,WC1E 7HB, England. E-mail: s.michie@ucl.ac.ukThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.Health Psychology © 2013 American Psychological Association
2013, Vol. 32, No. 5, 581–585 0278-6133/13/$12.00 http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0030205
581
may also be achieved by targeting theories at health care providers
and systems to maximize the implementation of evidence-basedpractice. It is therefore at least as important to generate theories oftranslation as it is to generate theories describing the behavior,cognition, and affect of the populations that are the ultimate target.This has not been tackled in the current special issue, but is a keyissue for future theorizing and empirical research. (The journalsTranslational Behavioral Medicine andImplementation Science
encourage such thinking.)
When theories have the purpose of informing the design of
effective interventions, they must be judged according to how farthey have achieved this or are likely to achieve it. A reasonablepresumption is that theories are more likely to lead to effectiveinterventions if they: include constructs that are clearly definedand used consistently, are not clearly falsified by existing obser-vations, explain the major observations in a parsimonious, coher-ent, and comprehensible narrative, and make predictions that canbe tested through observation. These multiple criteria of a goodtheory often require a trade-off. For example, the broader the scopeof a theory, the greater its potential range of application forintervention development, and the greater its likely complexity andlack of applicability to specific scenarios.
This commentary considers ways to maximize the likelihood
that (a) theoretical advances, such as those described in this issue,will influence clinical and public health practice, and (b) evalua-tions of clinical and public health practice will contribute totheoretical understanding. We propose four features of new theo-ries that will make them maximally useful to inform the design ofeffective interventions. We propose that new theories should: (a)be explicitly linked to the major theories from which they draw;(b) incorporate the context sensitivity and dynamic nature of theintervention target; (c) show convincing evidence that applicationof the theory leads to improved effectiveness according to rigorouscriteria; and (d) address all aspects of the translation processesincluding implementation by health care providers and engage-ment by the target population.
Feature 1: Linkage With Major Predecessor Theories
There is a long history of theory relevant to health behavior and
affect that extends back to the ancient Greeks. As Mook haspointed out in his comprehensive treatise on motivation ( Mook,
1995 ), Thrasymachus in the fourth century BC espoused the im-
portance of “self-interest” as the ultimate driver of behavior withthe attendant focus on reward and punishment as a means ofcontrolling behavior. Socrates by contrast proposed that onceindividuals had decided what was right and wrong, this guidedtheir actions. The former is of course the natural precursor tolearning theory, whereas the latter presages what has come to betermed decision theory . The former makes no major distinction
between humans and other animals, whereas the latter focuses onwhat appears to be distinctly human.
Learning theory does not presume that conscious reflection of
any kind has occurred. There are two aspects to this theory:operant and classical conditioning, with rich empirical and theo-retical histories. Operant conditioning ( Skinner, 1953 ) draws on
the observation that, through associative learning, cues that signalwhen behaviors will be rewarded or punished will come to controlbehavior. In classical conditioning ( Pavlov, 1927/1960 ), a stimulus(e.g., the sound of a bell) that, through association, is predictive of
another stimulus (e.g., delivery of food) can generate a response(e.g., salivation) that anticipates the latter stimulus. A huge body ofresearch has detailed how this system operates in humans andnonhumans, including the brain regions and neural pathways un-derlying it (see Mook, 1995 ). This body of work has led to
important behavior change applications in clinical and educationalpsychology, but has been largely neglected in health psychology,arguably because the latter developed after the so-called “cognitiverevolution” of the 1950s.
Decision theory emerged from economics, and it encapsulates
the view that our actions are governed by an analysis of the costsand benefits of those actions (often compared with others that wemight do instead). Put in terms of economics, we seek to maximizeour “expected utilities” ( Lindley, 1985 ). Under this theory, behav-
ior can be predicted by estimating the subjective expected utilitiesof options that are likely to be considered; behavior can be con-trolled by influencing these inputs to the decision process. Accord-ing to decision theory, this process may be incomplete, haphazard,subject to bias and misperception, and disrupted by emotion. Eventhough there may be nonconscious, associative influences on re-flective analysis, the presumption of decision theory is that thebehaviors of interest arise from this analysis.
Recent attempts have been made to integrate the two “book
ends” of learning theory and decision theory in what has come tobe termed automatic and reflective processing (e.g., Strack &
Deutsch, 2004 ). In one type of overarching model, dual-process
theories, the processes operate in parallel and are triggered bydifferent demands, but there is continual information flow betweenthem (see Keren & Schul, 2009 , for a critical evaluation). Another
type of overarching model, PRIME theory, differs in that it pro-poses that all behavior arises directly from automatic processing,to which reflective processing acts as one source of input ( West,
2006a ).
We highlight two theoretical mechanisms referred to in this
special issue that hold promise as potential bases for interventionsto change health behavior. The first is cognitive bias , a disposition
to process information in a particular way as a result of learned
emotional or motivational influences. The second is evaluative
conditioning , the process by which a stimulus comes to acquire
similar evaluative properties to another stimulus with which it ispaired ( Sheeran, Golwitzer, & Bargh, 2012 ). To maximize their
potential, it will be important to link these explicitly to the accu-mulated knowledge in both decision theory and learning theory.Leaving connections implicit may lead to (a) confusion regardingkey concepts within the new theories, (b) undermining the possi-bility of determining under what conditions the new theories areapplicable, and (c) potentially unhelpful restatements of elementsof the major theories using different terminology. If connectionsare made, it is possible to draw on a wealth of evidence relating tothe major theories to implement ideas from the new theories inintervention design. For example, because cognitive biases (e.g., ofattention, interpretation, and memory) are presumed to arise fromassociative learning, learning theory can inform us about param-eters that lead to their development. That knowledge base, in turn,can help guide training to reverse them by altering the patterningof stimuli, choice of reinforcer, and interactions with motivationalstates. In the case of evaluative conditioning, at present the effectsare weak and have rarely, if ever, been applied to important,This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.582 MICHIE, WEST, AND SPRING
long-term behavior change. To amplify such effects to a point
where they can be practically useful, it will be necessary to drawon the wealth of evidence from classical conditioning experimentsrelating to, for example, configuration and choice of stimuli,number and patterning of exposures, and contextual factors.
One of the applications suggested by Sheeran et al. (2012) is to
develop interventions geared at strengthening self-control. Basedon cognitive and social developments in learning theory, the 1970ssaw a blossoming of self-control techniques within clinical psy-chology (e.g., Thoresen & Mahoney, 1974 ;Meichenbaum, 1977 ).
Both social and health psychology would benefit from greaterengagement with the theoretical and applied developments withinclinical psychology over the last 40 years. Sheeran et al.’s (2012)
suggestion to extend the behavior change technique taxonomyapproach to techniques that draw on nonconscious processes hasseen some progress ( Michie et al., 2011 ), but would benefit from
integrating the knowledge base about the effectiveness of behaviorchange techniques that clinical psychologists have used to enhanceself-control.
Feature 2: Context Sensitivity and Dynamic Nature of
Intervention Targets
Behavior is highly context sensitive—both in whether it is
enacted and in the manner in which it is enacted. This posesconsiderable challenges for theories of behavior because of theneed to incorporate a potentially very diverse set of contexts intothe body of the theory. For example, the effect of priming may bedifferent in laboratory settings with particular sets of expectationsthan in a real-world environment. Systematically observed varia-tion in the effectiveness of interventions conducted in differentcontexts constitutes evidence to inform theoretical analyses of“behaviors-in-context.” The same is true for other targets of healthinterventions, such as subjective well-being. One preliminary at-tempt at an overarching model of “behavior-in-context” that isdesigned to be used for intervention development is the COM-Bsystem ( Michie, van Stralen, & West, 2011 ). Behavior is concep-
tualized as a system involving three essential interacting condi-tions: capability, opportunity, and motivation. This neatly mapson to the mechanisms that Mann, de Ridder, and Fujita (2012)
identify as underlying interventions to help people achieve theirgoals. These include selecting strategies to promote goal settingand goal striving (capability), identifying and promoting opportu-nities that are conducive to goal attainment, and maximizing theextent to which goals are intrinsically motivating.
As described in Mann et al. (2012) , self-regulation models
represent a step forward from predictive social cognition models inoutlining the dynamic psychological mechanisms underlying be-havior change. One of the challenges in such models is how toembody the dynamic and fluid nature of causal influence on amoment-to-moment basis. Our models and theories are fundamen-tally structural, in that they posit traits and states that have exis-tence of some duration rather than posit complex dialectical pro-cesses. For example, desires are generally thought of as inputs tomotivational processes such as decision-making. However, it islikely that they alter the very nature of the processes involved andthe other inputs to those processes.
Opportunities for developing more dynamic theories of
behavior-in-context have been greatly enhanced by new methodsfor collecting ecologically valid data in real time. The advent of
inexpensive, reliable, and unobtrusive measurement devices hasthe potential to revolutionize near-continuous data recording. Thisincludes handheld electronic recording devices (e.g., smartphones)or sensors on objects, as has been used to evaluate the impact oftheoretically driven messages on rates of hand washing with soapin motorway toilet facilities ( Judah et al., 2009 ). Data can be
individually tracked by real-time location systems that involvesensors on both people and objects, allowing movements andinteractions to be monitored externally. Mobile phone technologyand online social networking applications can be used to integratepast and future activities and feelings to enable tailored digitalbehavior change interventions without the need for users to answerquestions (see http://www.ubhave.org ;Coons, Roehrig, & Spring,
2011 ).
Feature 3: Adoption of Rigorous Criteria for
Demonstrating Intervention Effectiveness
Translation of theoretical perspectives into intervention strate-
gies depends on convincing others that the research is worthtranslating and having good links with key pathways for transla-tion. To achieve the first, the theoretical perspectives need to bewell supported by evidence, as understood by those to be con-vinced. Two key issues in relation to evidence are replication andgeneralizability. Good scientific practice is that a result is notconsidered to be “a finding” unless it has been replicated in at leastthree centers. Second, there is the issue of generalizability offindings across populations, settings, and types of behavior.
As noted earlier, to address the question of generalizability,
theories need to characterize behavior-in-context. This will pro-vide a basis for intervention evaluations carried out in differentcontexts to test theories. Without this, we cannot be confidentwhether a failure to replicate is theoretically meaningful or reflectschance variation. Such understanding is crucial if we are to test,refine, and develop our theories.
A further issue concerns the “real-world” significance of the
target variables. Health psychology requires findings for behav-ioral outcomes that have clear implications for health, for example,biochemically verified, sustained reductions in alcohol consump-tion. The effect sizes with this kind of outcome are usually small,even though such changes may be of major public health signifi-cance in terms of shifting the distribution of risk behaviors inthe entire population toward improved health ( Rose, 1985 ). Large
numbers of study participants are therefore required to ensuresufficient power to detect effects. For funders to provide theconsiderable investment of resources needed to conduct the re-search, the level of confidence required in the likely benefit ofapplying a certain theoretical perspective is much higher than thatneeded to support further social psychology laboratory research.
Scientific progress involves developing new theories or improv-
ing or abandoning existing ones. This raises the question as to whatstrength of evidence is required to change or abandon theories. Anargument can be made that, as a scientific community, we shouldengage in a better-coordinated, collective effort to rigorously testand modify theory. By prompting greater integration, this couldprevent the current plethora of partially overlapping theories withslightly different conceptualizations ( Michie et al., 2005 ). A bar-
rier to greater theoretical integration involves vested interestsThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.583 FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE AND BACK
(personal and commercial) in hanging on to theories despite an
accumulation of contrary evidence ( West, 2006b ). International
and cross-disciplinary coordination is key to achieving an optimalbalance between stability and change in psychological theory.
Feature 4: Coverage of All Aspects of the Translation
Process
“Translation” is the process of adapting theoretical principles
and empirical findings to the worlds of clinical and public healthpractice ( Sung et al., 2003 ;Westfall, Mold, & Fagnan, 2007 ;
Woolf, 2008 ). It proceeds through a series of phases. The first
phase (T1) uses knowledge from the study of basic mechanisms toinform the development and refinement of promising interven-tions. The second phase (T2) tests the effectiveness of interven-tions under conditions that are progressively more representativeof the general population and usual practice settings. For example,early T2 trials may begin by enrolling patients who have the targetproblem and no comorbidities, and by using research staff todeliver treatments in a university setting (efficacy testing). Effica-cious interventions may then be tested by having local staff in acommunity setting deliver the intervention to all patients as part oftheir regular job duties (effectiveness testing). The third transla-tional phase (T3 or “implementation”) focuses on ensuring thateffective interventions are routinely provided in day-to-day clini-cal care and public health practice. This requires studying andidentifying ways to overcome motivational, capability, and oppor-tunity barriers, which in turn requires good theories of behaviorchange at individual, social system, and policy levels. A fourthtranslational stage (T4) addresses uptake and engagement by thetarget population ( Khoury et al., 2007 ). Finally, we propose a fifth
phase of translation (T5), to be the study of how interventions aretransmitted through a population, for example, by social networks.
To date, the vast majority of social psychological research effort
in health has been dedicated to T1 translation. The articles in thisissue contain excellent examples of how social psychologicaltheories are beginning to be applied to translate insights fromlaboratory research into promising ideas about health interven-tions. As potentially effective interventions are developed, moretheoretical guidance will be needed for the subsequent phases ofresearch translation. For example, in T2 translation, there is a needfor more developed theory to guide how an intervention should beformatted, delivered (e.g., professional vs. peer, face-to-face vs.telephone, Internet), and timed (e.g., asynchronous vs. real time).
Theory is especially lacking in T3 and T4 translation, and yet
these are arenas to which social psychologists have much tocontribute. Can the same cognitive and emotional processes thatmotivate individuals to change unhealthy behaviors be harnessedto prompt clinicians and policymakers to adopt new practices?How do attachment styles thwart or support relationship dynamicsbetween patient and provider, especially when behaviors that theprovider intervenes to change (e.g., smoking, overeating) may bestigmatized? How can theory guide what clinics do to mitigate theadverse effects of prejudice on patient care? The challenges of T3also concern how to foster uptake of best practices into complexcare systems at the level of a clinic, hospital, or care deliverysystem.
Beyond dyadic or small group processes involving provider,
patient, and family, we need social psychological theory to eluci-date complex organizational dynamics involving different institu-
tional sectors that hold vantage points, interests, and resources thatmay or may not be aligned. Even when delivered with fidelity,interventions lack full impact unless patients and the generalpopulation engage sufficiently with them. Theories of T4 and T5translation are needed to guide population-level outreach thatinitiates, propagates, and maintains engagement and self-regulatory change.
In sum, the development of psychological and social interven-
tions has grown increasingly complex because of the increasedtechnological sophistication of many interventions and the need tofoster scale and sustainability by influencing social and institu-tional systems at multiple levels. A growing body of evidenceindicates that solutions to complex, multifaceted scientific chal-lenges benefit from cross-disciplinary collaboration among teamsof experts possessing diverse specialized knowledge. Translationalproblems involving clinical or public health interventions imposea need for insights not only from scientists, but also from practi-tioners and other stakeholders at different levels in the health caredelivery system. The challenges of working across disciplinary andscientific boundaries are considerable, but a systematized body ofknowledge and learning tools ( Falk-Krzesinski et al., 2010 ) has
begun to emerge (cf., http://www.teamscience.net andhttp://www
.teamsciencetoolkit.cancer.gov ). Even with the best evidence and
the most effective strategies, translation is difficult, given the nearuniversal separation of academic research and practical applicationwithin society. Steps toward improvement are in progress, withfunders encouraging research that includes users such as cliniciansand policymakers. Academic health science partnerships are alsodeveloping in several countries. An example in the United King-dom is the NHS National Centre for Smoking Cessation andTraining (NCSCT; http://www.ncsct.co.uk ). This “living labora-
tory” is based on bidirectional pathways between research evi-dence, including theoretical perspectives, on the one hand, andpractice, on the other. Funded by the UK Department of Health, itis directed by health psychologists and smoking researchers.NCSCT is tasked with improving evidence-based practice acrossall smoking cessation services in England, which treat over700,000 smokers a year. The data collected from routine clinicalpractice are analyzed by a team of scientists employed by NCSCTand used to address theoretical and empirical questions. Answersto these questions, in turn, feed into the training and other trans-lational activities.
Conclusion
Social psychological theories in this special issue offer consid-
erable promise for the development of interventions to improvehealth and well-being. There are major challenges ahead if thepotential of these theories is to be realized. Insofar as the theorieswill be judged on how well they inform the design of effectiveinterventions, we have proposed four features that can help thisprocess to work effectively. The theories should: (a) be explicitlylinked to the major theories from which they draw; (b) incorporatethe context sensitivity and dynamic nature of the interventiontarget; (c) show convincing evidence of improved effectivenessaccording to rigorous criteria; and (d) address all aspects of thetranslation processes, including implementation by health careproviders and engagement by the target population. All of this willThis document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.584 MICHIE, WEST, AND SPRING
require increased investment and coordination of activity through
research consortia across centers and countries.
References
Coons, M. J., Roehrig, M., & Spring, B. (2011). The potential of virtual
reality technologies to improve adherence to weight loss behaviors.Journal of Diabetes Science and Technology, 5 (2), 340–344.
Falk-Krzesinski, H. J., Börner, B., Contractor, N., Cummings, J., Fiore,
S. M., Hall, K. L. ,... Uzzi, B. (2010). Advancing the science of team
science. Clinical and Translational Sciences, 3, 263–266. doi:10.1111/
j.1752-8062.2010.00223.x
Judah, G., Aunger, R., Schmidt, W. P., Michie, S., Granger, S., & Curtis,
V. (2009). Experimental pretesting of hand-washing interventions in anatural setting. American Journal of Public Health, 99, S405–S411.
doi:10.2105/AJPH.2009.164160
Keren, G., & Schul, Y. (2009). Two is not always better than one: A critical
evaluation of two-system theories. Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
ence, 4, 533–550. doi:10.1111/j.1745-6924.2009.01164.x
Khoury, M. J., Gwinn, M., Yoon, P. W., Dowling, N., Moore, C. A., &
Bradley, L. (2007). The continuum of translation research in genomicmedicine: How can we accelerate the appropriate integration of humangenome discoveries into health care and disease prevention? Genetics in
Medicine, 9, 665–674. doi:10.1097/GIM.0b013e31815699d0
Lindley, D. (1985). Making decisions . Chichester, England: Wiley.
MacCurdy, E. (Ed.). (2003). The notebooks of Leonardo Da Vinci: Defin-
itive edition in one volume . Old Saybrook, CT: Konecky & Konecky.
Mann, T., de Ridder, D. T. D., & Fujita, K. (2012). Social psychological
approaches to self-regulation: Processes of goal setting and goal striving.Health Psychology . Advance online publication.
Meichenbaum, D. (1977). Cognitive-behavior modification: An integrative
approach . New York. NY: Plenum Press.
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Eccles, M. P., Francis, J. J., Hardeman, W., &
Johnston, M. (2011). Strengthening evaluation and implementation byspecifying components of behaviour change interventions: a study pro-tocol. Implementation Science, 6, 10.doi:10.1186/1748-5908-6-10
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R., Parker, D., & Walker,
A. (2005). Making psychological theory useful for implementing evi-dence based practice: A consensus approach. Quality & Safety in Health
Care, 14, 26–33. doi:10.1136/qshc.2004.011155
Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., & West, R. (2011). The behaviour change
wheel: A new method for characterising and designing behaviour changeinterventions. Implementation Science, 6, 42.doi:10.1186/1748-5908-
6-42
Mook, D. (1995). Motivation: The organization of action . New York, NY:
W. W. Norton.
Newell, A. (1973). You can’t play 20 questions with nature and win:
Projective comments on the papers of this symposium. In W. G. Chase(Ed.), Visual information processing (pp. 283–308). New York, NY:
Academic Press.
Pavlov, I. P. (1960). Conditional reflexes . New York, NY: Dover Publi-
cations. (Original work published 1927)
Rose, G. (1985). Sick individuals and sick populations. International
Journal of Epidemiology, 14, 32–38. doi:10.1093/ije/14.1.32
Sheeran, P., Gollwitzer, P. M., & Bargh, J. A. (2012). Nonconscious
processes and health. Health Psychology . Advance online publication.
doi:10.1037/a0029203
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior . New York, NY:
Macmillan.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Reflective and impulsive determinants of
social behavior. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 220–247.
doi:10.1207/s15327957pspr0803_1
Sung, N. S., Crowley, W. F., Jr., Genel, M., Salber, P., Sandy, L.,
Sherwood, L. M. ,... Rimoin, D. (2003). Central challenges facing the
national clinical research enterprise. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 289, 1278–1287. doi:10.1001/jama.289.10.1278
Thoresen, C. E., & Mahoney, M. J. (1974). Behavioral self-control . Austin,
TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
VandenBos, G. R. (2006). APA dictionary of psychology . Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association.
West, R. (2006a). Theory of addiction . Oxford, England: Blackwell Pub-
lishing.
West, R. (2006b). The transtheoretical model of behaviour change and the
scientific method. Addiction, 101, 774–778. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443
.2006.01502.x
Westfall, J. M., Mold, J., & Fagnan, L. (2007). Practice-based research—
“Blue highways” on the NIH roadmap. Journal of the American Medical
Association, 297, 403–406. doi:10.1001/jama.297.4.403
Woolf, S. H. (2008). The meaning of translational research and why it
matters. Journal of the American Medical Association, 299, 211–213.
doi:10.1001/jama.2007.26
Received August 18, 2011
Revision received April 16, 2012
Accepted April 17, 2012 /H18546This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.585 FROM THEORY TO PRACTICE AND BACK
