Letter to the Editor
Changing Behavior:
Theoretical DevelopmentNeeds Protocol Adherence
The Behavior Change Consortium (BCC;
Bellg et al., 2004) maintains that rigorous
evaluation of behavior change interventionsrequires strict adherence to protocol-drivenstudy designs, provider training, interven-
tion delivery, understanding of the interven-tion (receipt), and use of intervention skills(enactment). Leventhal and Friedman (2004)cautioned that this approach may be “a bar-rier to theoretical and empirical workneeded for the development of a scienceand practice of interventions” (p. 456).
The BCC is primarily focussed on the
relationship of behavioral changes to de-
sired clinical outcomes and considers thebehavioral intervention to include interven-tion delivery, receipt, and enactment. Thereare two reasons that this is not helpful. TheOxford English Dictionary (OED Online ,
2005) defines an intervention as an “actionof intervening, ‘stepping in’, or interferingin any affair, so as to affect its course orissue,” that is, the actions of the intervener,not the recipient. It is conceptually morecoherent to consider receipt and enactmentas part of the response to the interventionrather than as part of the intervention.
Because behavior change interventions
are designed to change behavior, behavior
should be the primary outcome (Michie &Abraham, 2004). There are many reasonsthat interventions may be effective inachieving the desired behavior change but
do not translate into desired clinical out-comes (Campbell et al., 2000). Behavior isnot an isolated event, but it is part of aprocess that includes perception, under-standing, and preparatory behaviors. If peo-
ple do not respond to the intervention asintended (e.g., poor understanding or adher-ence to intervention requirements), the na-ture of the intervention and how it is deliv-ered should be modified. In other words,provider training and intervention deliveryare independent variables, and receipt andenactment are dependent variables.
Improving the effectiveness of behavioral
interventions requires knowledge of howthese inventions work. Leventhal and Fried-man (2004) argued that assessing variation
in response to interventions across situa-tions, providers, and participants is a nec-essary part of building a theoretical under-standing of the process of change. This is apoint well made. They also criticized “forc-ing the delivery procedure into a rigid,manualized treatment” (p. 454). However,unless one is clear that the delivered inter-vention is the one planned, one can make noclaims about the theoretical basis of effec-tive interventions. It does not matterwhether the planned intervention is a flex-ible application of behavioral componentsor whether it is rigid and manualized: Oneshould be clear about which it is and assessits fidelity accordingly.
It is possible to combine a manualized
intervention that delivers theory-based be-
havioral components with an assessment of
the behaviors shown in practice by thosedelivering the intervention (Hardeman,Michie, Prevost, Fanshawe, & Kinmonth,2003). Thus, data can be collected on whichaspects of the manual were adhered to andwhich intervention components were deliv-ered, and therefore had the potential tochange behavior. In this way, two areas thatare necessary for intervention developmentcan be advanced: the understanding of thetheoretical basis of behavior change and the
pragmatic difficulties of intervention deliv-
ery.
Susan Michie
University College London
References
Bellg, A.J., Borrelli, B., Resnick, B., Hecht,
J., Mincucci, D. S., Ory, M., et al. (2004).
Enhancing treatment fidelity in health be-havior change studies: Best practices andrecommendations from the NIH BehaviorChange Consortium. Health Psychology,
23,443–451.
Campbell, M., Fitzpatrick, R., Haines,
A., Kinmonth, A. L., Sandercock, P.,
Spiegelhalter, D., & Tyrer, P. (2000).
Framework for design and evaluation ofcomplex interventions to improve health.British Medical Journal, 321, 694–696.
Hardeman, W., Michie, S., Prevost, T., Fan-
shawe, T., & Kinmonth, A. L. (2005). Dotrained health practitioners use behaviourchange techniques in practice? Resultsfrom ProActive. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine, 29, S014.
Leventhal, H., & Friedman, M. A. (2004).
Does establishing fidelity of treatmenthelp in understanding efficacy? Comment
on Bellg et al. (2004). Health Psychology,
23,452–456.
Michie, S., & Abraham, C. (2004). Identi-
fying techniques that promote health be-
haviour change: Evidence based or evi-dence inspired? Psychology and Health,
19, 29–49.
OED Online . (2005). Available from http://
www.oed.com
DOI: 10.1037/0278-6133.24.4.439
Health Psychology, 2005, Vol. 24, No. 4, 439
Copyright 2005 by the American Psychological Association 0278-6133/05/$12.00
439
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
