promot ing access to White Rose research papers  
   
White Rose Research Online  
eprints@whiterose.ac.uk  
 
 
 
Universities of Leeds, Sheffield and York  
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/  
 
 
 
This is an author prod uced version of a paper published in Health Psychology . 
White Rose Re search Online  URL for this paper:  
 
http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/76353 / 
 
 
 
 
Paper : 
Michie, S  and Prestwich, A  (2010) Are interventions theory -based? Development 
of a Theory Coding Scheme.  Health Psychology, 29 (1). 1 - 8 (8).  
 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0016939  
 
 1 
 
 
APA Copyright Notice: This article may not exactly replicate the final version 
published in the APA journal. It is not the copy of record. This is a preprint of an article 
whose final and definitive form has been published in Health Psychology  © 2010 Ame rican 
Psychological Association DOI: 10.1037/a0016939 ; Health Psychology  is available online 
at http://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/hea/index.aspx  . The final and definitive form of the 
article c an be found at http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/hea/29/1/1/   
 
Running Head: CODING THEORY  
 
 
Are interventions theory -based?  Development of a Theory Coding Scheme  
 
Susan Michie  
Centre for Outcomes  Research and Effectiveness, University College London, UK  
Andrew Prestwich  
Institute of Psychological Sciences, University of Leeds, UK  
 
Author Note  
We would like to thank Falko Sniehotta, Kali Demes, Ben Gardner, John McAteer 
and Lizzie Rogers for their helpful input  in developing the coding scheme  and Robert 
West, Mark Conner, Rebecca Lawton, and David French for helpful comments on an 
earlier draft.  Correspondence should be addressed to Professor Susan Michie, Centre 
for Outcomes Research and Effectiven ess, University College London, 1 -19 
Torrington Place, London WC1E 7HB, United Kingdom, email: s.michie@ucl.ac.uk 
Tel. +44 (0) 207 679 5930; Fax: +44 (0) 207 916 8511.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 2 
 
Abstract  
Objective  
Interventions are increasingly described as theory -based; howe ver, the basis for this  is 
often not clear. Advancing behavioural science requires a good understanding of how 
interventions are informed by, and test, theory. This study aims to develop  a reliable 
method for assessing the extent to which behavioural inter ventions are theory -based.  
Design  
The reliability, usability, and comprehensiveness of an initial coding scheme were 
improved in 13 iterative stages on the basis of its application to 29 papers from a 
systematic review of interventions to promote physical  activity and healthy eating. 
Results  
The final Theory Coding Scheme  contained 19 items, each with satisfactory inter -
rater reliabilities, coding whether a theory or model was mentioned, how theories 
were  used in intervention design, how intervention evalu ations test ed theory and the 
implications of the results for future theory development . 
Conclusion  
The Theory Coding Scheme is an important methodological innovation, providing a research 
tool to reliably describe the theoretical base of interventions, inf orm evidence syntheses 
within literature reviews and meta -analyses, and stimulate the use of empirical data for theory 
development.   
 
Key words: Theory, behaviour change, interventions  
 
 3 
Introduction  
 There is growing recognition in the discipline of psycho logy, and the broader 
health services research and public health community (Campbell et al., 2000; Craig et 
al., 2008 ), that the development and imple mentation of behaviour change 
technologies are enhanc ed by applying  theory.  Theory provides a common 
description of what is known within  an organising  system .  Within the behavioural 
and social sciences, the term “theory” has been defined variously, but definitions tend 
to share a core set of common ideas, elegantly expressed in the following:  
“A theory pres ents a systematic way of understanding events or situations.  
It is a set of concepts, definitions, and propositions that explain or predict 
these events or situations by illustrating the relationships between variables .” 
Glanz  and Rimer  (2005, p.4). 
Applyi ng theory leads both to “a steadily  richer and more potent picture of how things 
work” (Clarke, 1987, p.35) and to the refinement of the theory from which they 
derived.   The problem of research that lacks explicit theory is characterised by Clarke 
as “pie ces of a jigsaw which accumulate in journals ….despite the fact that a real jig-
saw puzzle can only be made by taking a picture and cutting it up into pieces, not by 
making pieces and hoping they will form a picture.” (p.35)  
 Explicit use of theory in desi gning and evaluating interventions has several 
benefits. First, theory can be used to inform interventions by identifying constructs 
(key concepts in the theory) that are hypothesised to be  causally related to behaviour 
and are therefore appropriate target s for the intervention. Changing constructs that 
cause behaviour will, theoretically, lead to behaviour change (Hardeman et al., 2005). 
Using theory in this way can confer a range of benefits including potentially stronger 
effects (Albarracin et al., 2005;  Downing, Jones, Cook, & Bellis, 2006;  Fisher & 
 4 
Fisher, 2000; Gehrman & Hovell, 2003; Kim, Stanton , Li, Dickersin, & Galbraith , 
1997).  First, b y identifying theoretical constructs to target, theory provides a means 
for selecting component intervention tec hniques (Wingood & DiClemente, 1996; 
Michie, Johnston, Francis, Hardeman,  & Eccles,  2008)  and for  refin ing or tailoring 
intervention techniques ( Noar, Benac, & Harris, 2007 ).  Second, c ollecting empirical 
data within a theoretical framework facilitates the  accumulation of evidence of 
effectiveness across different contexts, populations and behaviours.  Third, a s well as 
using theory to inform intervention development, theory -based interventions can aid 
understanding of why interventions are effective or ine ffective, thus facilitating  an 
understanding of mechanisms of change and providing  a basis for refining and 
developing better theory ( Jemmott & Jemmott, 2000; Michie & Abraham, 2004).  In 
this way, there is a synergistic cycle  of intervention development an d evaluation.  
 Despite the apparent advantages of applying theory to interventions, a 
substantial proportion of studies, identified in reviews, fails to make explicit reference 
to theory, let alone explicitly apply or test it (see Albarracin et al, 2005 ; Trifiletti, 
Gielen, Sleet, & Hopkins 2005; Noar & Zimmerman, 2005 ; Dombrowski, Sniehotta , 
& Avenell, 2007). Studies are  traditionally less likely to be developed within an 
organising conceptual framework in the behavioural and social sciences than in the 
biomedical and physical sciences (Clarke, 1987).  Theory is too often used as a „loose 
framework‟, to which passing reference is made, rather than as an integral part of a 
rigorous scientific process.  Where a theoretical base for an intervention is stated, 
there is seldom reference to a method describing how the theory informed the design 
of the intervention, or how the evaluation tests theory (Rothman, 2004). This may 
reflect a lack of consideration as to how theory might be used to inform and evaluate 
the intervention at the planning stage, or poor articulation of these issues at the 
 5 
dissemination stage.  Where theoretically informed interventions have been developed 
and thoroughly tested, there has been limited consideration of the implications of the 
findings for theory revision or development (Michie, Sheeran, & Rothman, 2007).  
  Current practice in systematic reviews of behavioural interventions is to deem 
an intervention to be theory -based if authors cite  theory -based literature in relation to 
the inte rvention .  Examples of such reviews in the area of prevention of sexually 
transmitted infections are Albarracin et al. (2005), Downing et al. (2006), Fisher & 
Fisher (2000), Jemmott & Jemmott (2000), Kim et al. (1997) and Wingood & 
DiClemente (1996) and, in the area of smoking , Gehrman  & Hovell (2003).  Other 
reviews that cross several behavioural domains are Baban & Craciun  (2007 ) and 
Webb & Sheeran ( 2006 ).  Many of these reviews claim that interventions grounded in 
theories of behaviour change were more e ffective. However, most of these claims are 
not backed by strong evidence, and few authors who cite theory as the basis for their 
interventions explain the method by which this is done.   
  Frameworks have been developed for designing and evaluating comple x 
interventions that give theory a central role within the process e.g. UK Medical 
Research Council´s framework (Campbell et al., 2000; Craig et al., 2008)  and 
Intervention Mapping (Bartholomew, Parcel, Kok,  & Gottlieb, 2006).  However, they 
do not give detailed guidan ce as to how to use theory to design interventions, nor how 
to use evaluations of behaviour change interventions to test and develop theory 
(Michie , Sheeran, & Rothman, 2007) .  If we are to improve our understanding of how 
interventions effect change, to develop more effective interventions  and to use 
empirical evaluation to develop theory, we need to develop a more precise and 
scientific method for linking behaviour change theory to designing and evaluating 
intervent ions to change behaviour.  We need a common understanding of what 
 6 
“theory -based” means and a rigorous method for assessing the theoretical base for 
interventions.   
 This paper  reports the development of a detailed , objective and reliable 
method for assess ing the extent to which behavioural interv entions are theory -based, 
specifically the degree to which intervention development and evaluation  are 
informed by, and therefore can inform, behaviour change theory.  
 
Method  
Conceptualisation  
 The starting point f or the coding frame came from Ellis et al. (2003) who 
posited that theory -based interventions require the following ; named „modifying 
factors‟, explanations as to how these factors will bring about change, methods to 
demonstrate changes in the modifying fa ctors, and demonstration of how those 
changes contributed to behaviour change. We operationalised these concepts as three 
categories: whether the relevant theoretical constructs („modifying factors‟) were 
targeted by intervention techniques, whether these constructs were measured and 
whether mediation effects were tested.  
Initial development  
 An initial coding scheme of 10 items was generated, with two to six response options per 
item: (1) theory specified in introduction to journal article (2) psychologic al constructs specified 
in the introduction (3) intervention was generally theory informed (4) intervention focused on 
either one or more than one specific theory (5) explicit description of how theory -based 
interventions targeted psychological constructs (6) all theoretical constructs were measured (7) at 
least one theoretical construct was measured (8) change in any/all theoretical constructs was 
measured (9) mediation of any/all theoretical constructs was measured (10) findings were 
 7 
explained in relation  to theory , or theories , on which the intervention was based. These 10 items 
reflected the three categories outlined in the conceptualisation section above. Specifically, items 
1-5 related to whether the relevant theoretical constructs were targeted by int ervention 
techniques, item 6 -7 related to whether theoretical constructs were measured and items 8 -10 
referred to whether mediation effects were tested and how the intervention brought about 
behaviour change.  
 The initial coding scheme1 was applied by one of the authors to 29 papers of a 
systematic review of interventions to increase healthy eating in the general population 
(Michie, Abraham, Whittington , & McAteer , 2007).  A sub -set of papers was coded 
by the other author . Following discussions between the  coders, some items were re -
worded and the response options were simplified to either yes/no or all/some/none. 
Definitions of theory (or model), theory -relevant construct, predictor and intervention 
technique were then generated.   
Refinement  
 The initial scheme was tested by four independent raters in a series of 13 iterative stages 
coding papers from  a systematic review of interventions to increase healthy eating in the general 
population ( Michie, Abraham, Whittington , & McAteer , 2007 ). Ten of these  stage s involved two 
raters, one involved three and two involved one. The scheme was refined on the  basis of 
discussion between the authors concerning comprehensiveness, clarity and ease of use, feedback 
from independent raters, and the inter -rater reliability o f each item. The final modification was 
made following the comments of an anonymous reviewer, revising  items  12 and 1 5 and adding 
items 1 3 and 19 . Inter-rater reliability of two independent coders was assessed using Cohen‟s 
kappa statistic. A Cohen‟s kappa  value between .61 and .80 reflects substantial agreement 
(Landis & Koch, 1977). An overview of the 1 3 iterative stages is provided in Table 1.  
 
 8 
Insert Table 1  here 
 
A glossary of key terms was first introduced at stage 6. The final definitions used as a g uide for 
coders were:  
Theory (or Model):  „a set of interrelated concepts, definitions and propositions that present a 
systematic  view of events or situations by specifying relations among variables, in order to 
explain  or predict  the events or situations‟ (Glanz and Rimer , 2005 , p.4). Examples provided in 
the guidance include: Theory of Planned Behaviour, Theory of Reasoned Action, Health Belief 
Model and Stages of Change/Trans -Theoretical Model . 
Theory -relevant construct: A construct (a key concept, exclud ing behaviour) within a 
theory/model upon which the intervention is based.  A „Table of Theories‟ was 
included in the coding guidance to assist coders in identifying whether a particular 
construct belongs to the specified theory.  
Predictor: A construct th at is not explicitly linked to a theory by the authors, but is targeted for 
intervention (as a means to change behaviour) because it predicts behaviour. Predictors were 
only coded if the author had presented evidence that the construct predicts/correlates with/causes 
behaviour. Predictors did not include actual behaviour, self -reported or otherwise (e.g. amount of 
time spent exercising), or biological factors (e.g., age, gender), or demographic factors (e.g. 
socio -economic status).  
Intervention Technique: Strategy used to change behaviour, theory -relevant construct or 
predictor (e.g., providing information on consequences; prompting specific goal setting; 
prompting barrier identification; modelling the behaviour; planning social support).  
 
 
 
 9 
Results  
 The fi nal Theory Coding Scheme comprised 19 items with a clear description 
of how to code each item2. Each item required a yes/no/don‟t know response  and the 
coder to identify the supporting evidence. All items showed substantial inter -rater 
reliability (all κs ≥ .70)  except one sub -item ( 19d, κ =.64) which had a lower , but 
acceptable  kappa and a high level of agreement between coders (18/19, 95%).  The 
scheme and kappa values are shown in Table 2. The items are presented within the 
following six categories of  coded items: reference to underpinning theory (items 1 to 
3), targeting of relevant theoretical constructs (items 2, 5, 7 -11), using theory to select 
recipients or tailor interventions (items 4 and 6) , measurement of constructs (item s 12 
and 13 ), testin g of mediation effects (items 14 -18) and refining theory (item 19 ).  
Category 1 : Is theory mentioned ? 
 These items assessed stated or suggested, rather than demonstrated, theoretical 
base. One item assessed whether theory was mentioned even if the interventi on was 
not explicitly based on it (item 1). A second item related to whether predictors of the 
targeted behaviour (item 2) were mentioned (and also targeted) while a third (item 3) 
assessed whether the intervention was based on a single or multiple theorie s. An 
intervention based on a number of different theories or a combination of theory and 
„predictors‟ makes the links between theory and the intervention more complex and, 
usually, obscure.  This makes theory testing more difficult. Often studies use a wi de 
variety of behaviour change techniques in the hope that it will change something  but 
this something is often unspecified and not linked to the theory upon which the 
intervention is stated to have been based.  
Category 2 : Are the relevant theoretical cons tructs targeted?  
 10 
 Whether evidence was provided that a targeted theoretical construct predicted 
behaviour was assessed by item 2 and whether theory or predictors were explicitly 
used for designing the intervention was assessed by item 5 . Items 7 -11 examine  the 
extent to which the intervention targets particular theory -relevant constructs. Items 7 
and 10 reflect the optimal options as each intervention technique is associated with a 
specific theoretical construct, clarifying the theoretical basis for each be haviour 
change technique (item 7) or each theoretical construct is associated with a specific 
technique, facilitating theory testing (item 10).  Items 8, 9 and 11 refer to different, 
less optimal, ways of mapping (i.e. not one -to-one) between intervention techniques 
and theoretical constructs/predictors.   
Category 3: Is theory to select recipients or tailor interventions  
 Theory may also be used to select participants likely to benefit from the 
intervention (item 4) or to tailor the intervention to the nee ds of a particular individual 
(item 6).  
Category 4 : Are the relevant theoretical constructs measured?   
 Item 12 assesses whether the relevant theory -based constructs/predictors have 
been measured.   Item 13  assesses the reliability and validity of measures of relevant 
constructs/ predictors and of behaviour, as high measurement quality permits more 
powerful application, testing and refinement of theory.  
Category 5 : Is theory  tested?  
 While items 1 -11 concern the extent to which interventions have been based 
on theory, items 12 -18 concern theory  testing . Items 12 -14 assess either whether 
theoretical constructs are measured adequately pre- and post -intervention, or whether 
post-intervention measures are accompanied by satisfactory randomisation 
procedures. Item  15 assesses  whether the intervention changes the targeted theoretical 
 11 
constructs and  items 16-18 assess whether these changes explain the effect.  Item 16 
assesses whether constructs have been demonstrated to mediate the effect of the 
intervention on beha viour and items 17 and 18 assess whether results are discussed in 
relation to theory and whether support or refutation of the theory is appropriate, given 
the results.  
Category 6 : Is theory refined ? 
 Item 19 assesses whether the results of evaluating theor y-based interventions 
are used to refine theory . 
 
Overview of Final Scheme  
 The conceptual underpinnings of Items 7 -11 are shown in Figure 1, and a 
diagrammatic representation of the coding scheme is shown in Figure 2.  It assesses 
whether theory is mentio ned (1, 3), how theory can directly  inform an intervention (2, 
5, 7-11), how theory can influence an intervention indirectly  via the selection of 
participants (4) and via delivery to different groups of participants (6), how theory 
explains the effects of the intervention on outcomes (12 -16), the association between 
outcomes and theory (1 7-18) and  whether theory is refined on the basis of the study 
outcomes (1 9)  
Insert Figures 1 & 2 here 
 
Discussion  
 We have developed a reliable method for assessing the ex tent to which theory 
has been applied to developing and evaluating interventions to change behaviour.  The 
Theory Coding Scheme comprises 19 items covering a broad range of areas in which 
theory can play a role in psychological research. The scale was devel oped through 1 3 
 12 
phases to improve the comprehensiveness, usability, clarity and reliability of the 
method.  
 The Theory Coding Scheme has a number of potential benefits and 
applications. First, it can be used as a measure within reviews and meta -analyses. 
Specifically, it can provide a means for a more rigorous and systematic examination 
of the use of theory within intervention research than the approaches adopted in 
evidence syntheses of intervention effectiveness (e.g.,  Albarracin et al., 2005; Baban 
& Cr aciun, 2007; Trifiletti et al., 2005; Webb & Sheeran, 2006). Typically such 
reviews ask the question of whether theory -based interventions are more effective 
than those that are not based on theory. Unfortunately, they consistently fail to 
consider exactly  how theory has informed the intervention. This scheme will allow a 
more fine -grained examination of whether the use of theory can enhance the effects of 
interventions and how these benefits can be achieved.  
 Second, it provides a potentially valuable fra mework for describing 
interventions, and the role that theory has played, to the scientific community. The 
CONSORT (Consolidated Standards for Reporting Trials) guidelines have been used 
to improve the way in which studies, particularly their methodologies , are conveyed 
to readers. Consequently, the methodological quality of randomized controlled trials 
(RCTs) can be more reliably considered, potentially helping to reduce heterogeneity 
in effect sizes across similar studies. The Theory Coding Scheme might b e used in a 
similar way to encourage researchers to articulate their use of theory with greater 
clarity and depth. Within intervention evaluations, theory can be tested and ultimately  
refined only if the use of theory is explicit and well reported.  A thi rd use of the 
scheme is as a framework to inform the design of theory -based interventions.  By 
highlighting ways in which theory can be used to select, apply and test interventions, 
 13 
the coding frame can encourage more careful consideration of what constitu tes 
theory -based interventions and how they can be most usefully developed and 
evaluated.   
 The original CONSORT guidelines (Begg et al, 1996) were built upon earlier 
guidelines (The Standards of Reporting Trials Group, 1994; Working Group on 
Recommendati ons for Reporting of Clinical Trials in the Biomedical Literature, 
1994).  Similarly, this Theory Coding Scheme represents an initial scheme.  Its 
usefulness will be determined by its application. The items in categories 2 and 5 
potentially lend themselves  to forming a quantitative scale; the current coding scheme 
is a starting point for further conceptual and methodological refinement.   
 The Theory Coding Scheme can also be applied to assessments of the 
processes through which theory -informed intervention s change behaviour. Mediation 
analyses are often conducted to indirectly assess a proposed causal mechanism of 
change.  Whilst statistical methods of mediation analyses are becoming more 
powerful and sophisticated e.g. using  bootstrapping (Cerin, Taylor, L eslie, & Owen, 
2006; Preacher & Hayes, 2004), it should be remembered that finding a statistically 
significant indirect effect supportive of mediation does not prove causation. One 
limitation of testing theory by examining mediation is that measuring const ructs 
might, in itself, bring about  changes in behaviour (e.g., Morwitz & Fitzsimmons, 
2004 ; Godin , Sheeran , Conner , & Germain , 2008) and thus interfere with the 
interpretation of  effects . In addition, demonstrating mediation statistically does not 
demonstrate a causal relationship between the mediator  and the dependent measure; a 
better approach is to experimentally manipulate the proposed mediator, guided by the 
theory under test  (Sigall & Mills, 1998). Thus, mediation should not be claimed 
 14 
without appropriate tests, and the possibility of alternative causal explanations should 
be considered.  
 A further issue in theory development is what constitutes sufficient evidence 
to refute  a theory.  In biological sciences, a rule of thumb is that support or refutation 
requires independent replication in three independent laboratories.  In the behavioural 
sciences, this is more likely to be seen in laboratory than in applied settings.  For 
example, within the implementation intention (Gollwitzer, 1993) literature, tests of 
mechanisms are almost exclusively laboratory -based (see Gollwitzer & Sheeran, 
2006, for a review of mechan isms). It cannot be assumed that  mechanisms 
demonstrated in labor atories  operate  in more applied settings.  Addressing these, and 
other questions concerning the application of theory to interventions, will be helped 
by a systematic method of assessing the way in which theory has been applied.  This 
coding scheme is one method; such methods are foundational for developing this area 
of behavioural science.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 15 
References  
Albarracin, D., Gillette, J. C. , Earl, A. N., Glasman, L. R., Durantini, M.  R., & 
Ho, M.  H. (2005). A test of major assumptions about behavi or cha nge: a 
comprehensive look  at the effects of passive and active HIV -prevention in terventions 
since the beginning  of the epidemic. Psychological Bulletin, 131,  856- 897.  
 
Baban, A., & C raciun, C. (2007). Changing health -risk behaviors: A review of  
theory  and evidence -based interventions in health psychology. Journal of Cognitive 
and Behavioral Psychotherapies , 7, 45-67. 
 
Bartholomew, L. K., Parcel, G. S., Kok, G., & Gottlieb, N. H. (2006).  
Planning health  promotion programs; an Intervention Mapping approach . San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey -Bass.  
 
Begg C., Cho , M., Eastwood , S., Horton, R., Moher, D., Olkin, I. , Pitkin, R.,  
Rennie,  D., Schulz, K. F., Simel, D., & Stroup, D. F. (1996). Improving the quality of 
reporting of randomized controlled trials. The CONSORT  statement , Journal of the 
American Medical Association , 276, 637 -9. 
 
Campbell, M., Fitzpatrick, R.,  Haines, A., Kinmonth, A. L., Sandercock, P.  
Spiegelhalter, D., & Tyrer, P. (2000) . Framework for design and evaluation of  
complex  interventions to improve health. British Medical Journal , 321,  694-696. 
 
Cerin, E., Taylor, L. M., Leslie, E., & Owen, N. (2006). Small -scale  
 16 
randomized controlled trials need more powerful methods of meditational analyses 
than the Baron-Kenny method. Journal of Clinical Epidemio logy, 59, 457 -464.  
 
Clarke, D. D.  (1987) . Fundamental problems with fundamental research: A  
meta --theory for social psychology. Philosophica , 40, 23-61. 
 
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew, M.  
(2008) . Developing and evaluating complex interven tions: the new Medical Research 
council guidance. British Medical Journal , 337 . 
 
Dombrowski, S. U., Sniehotta , F. F., & Avenell, S. (2007) . Towards a  
cumulative  science of behaviour change: Do current condu ct and reporting o f 
behavioural  interventions fall short of good practice?  Psychology and Health , 22, 
869-874. 
 
Downing, J., Jones, L., Cook, P.  A., & Bellis, M. A. (2006) . Prevention of  
sexually transmitted infections (STIs): a review of review s into the effectiveness of non 
clinical interventions. Evidence Briefing Update . London, UK: National Institute of 
Clinical Excellence .  
 
Ellis, S., Barnett -Page, E., Morgan, A., Taylor, L., Walters, R., & Goodrich, J.  
(2003) . HIV prevention: a review of reviews assessing the ef fectiveness of 
interventions to  reduce the risk of sexual transmission . London , UK : Health 
Development Agency . 
 
 17 
Fisher, J. D., & Fisher, W. A. (2000) . Theoretical approaches to ind ividual  
level change in HIV risk behaviour . In Handbook o f HIV prevention, Pert erson and  
DiClemente. Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers, New York.  
 
Gehrman, C. A., & Hovell, M. F. (2003). Protect ing children from  
environmental  tobacco smoke (ETS) exposure: A critical review. Nicotine & Tobacco 
Research, 5, 289-301. 
 
  Glanz, K. & Rime r, B.K. (2005). Theory at a Glance: A Guide for Health 
Promotion Practice  (Second edition). National Cancer Institute, NIH, Public Health 
Service. U.S. Government Printing Office.  
 
Godin, G., Sheeran, P., Conner, M., Germa in, M. (2008). Asking questions  
changes behaviour: mere measurement effects on frequency of blood donation. Health  
Psychology, 27 , 179 -84.  
 
Gollwitzer, P.  M. (1993).  Goal achievement: The role of intentions.  In W. 
Stroebe  and M. Hewstone (Eds.), European Review of Social Psychology, 4 , 141-185. 
Chichester, England: Wiley.  
 
Gollwitzer, P.  M., & Sheeran, P. (2006).  Imp lementation intentions and goal  
achievement: A meta -analysis of effects and processes.  Advances in Experimental  
Social Psychology , 38, 249 -268.  
 
 Hardeman, W.,  Sutton, S.,  Griffin, S., Johnston, M., White, A., Wareham, N., & 
 18 
Kinmonth , A. L. (2005). A causal modelling approa ch to the development of theory  
based behavior change programmes for trial evaluation.  Health Education Research,  
20, 676-687. 
 
Jemmott, J. B., & Jemmott , L. S. (2000). HIV risk red uction behavioral  
Interventions  with heterosexual adolescents. AIDS, 14 (suppl 2), S40-S52. 
 
Kim, N., Stanton, B., Li, X., Dickersin, K., & Galbraith, J. (1997) .  
Effectiveness of  the 40 adolescent AIDS -risk reduction intervent ions: A quantitative 
review. Journal of Adolescent Health, 20,  204-215. 
 
Landis, J. R., & Koch, G. G. (1977). The measur ement of observer agreement  
for categorical data. Biometrics , 33, 159 -174. 
 
Michie, S . & Abraham, C. (2004) . Identifying  techniques that promote health  
behaviour change: Evidence based or evidence inspired? Psychology and Health.  19, 
29-49. 
 
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Whittington, C., & McAteer, J. (2007).  The impact  
and mechanisms of self -regulation interventions to incre ase healthy eating and 
physical  activity. Psychology and Health , 22, Suppl 1,  258. 
 
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Francis, J., Hardeman, W. , & Eccles, M. (2008) . 
From theory to intervention: mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants 
 19 
to behaviour change techniques. Applied Psychology: an International Review, 57, 
660-680. 
Michie, S., Sheeran, P. &  Rothman, A. (2007) . Advancing the Science of 
Behaviour Change. Invited editorial, Psychology and Health, 22, 249-253. 
 
Morwitz, V. G., & Fitzsimmons, G. J. (2004). The mere -measurement effect: 
Why does measuring intentions change actual behavior. Journal of Consumer 
Psychology , 14, 64-73. 
 
  Noar, S. M., & Zimmerman, R. S. (2005). Health Behavior Theory and 
cumulative knowledge regarding health behaviors: are we moving in th e right 
direction? Health Education Research: Theory and Practice , 20, 275 -290. 
 
  Noar, S. M., Benac, C. N., & Harris, M. S. (2007). Does tailoring matter? 
Meta -analytic review of tailored print health behaviour change interventions. 
Psychological Bulleti n, 133 , 673 -693. 
 
  Preacher, K. J., & Hayes, A. F. (2004).  SPSS and SAS procedures for 
estimating indirect effects in simple mediation models. Behaviour Research Methods, 
Instruments & Computers , 36, 717 -731. 
 
  Rothman, A. J. (2004). “Is there nothing m ore practical than a good theory?”: 
Why innovations and advances in health behavior change will arise if interventions 
are used to test and refine theory.  International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and 
Physical Activity, 1, 11 , 1-7.  
 20 
 
Sigall, H., & Mil ls, J. (1998). Measures of independent variables and 
mediators are useful in social psychology experiments: But are they necessary? 
Review of Personality and Social Psychology, 2 , 218 -226. 
 
The Standards of Reporting Trials Group  (1994) . A proposal for str uctured 
reporting of randomized controlled trials. The Standards of Reporting Trials Group. 
Journal of the American Medical Association ,  272, 1926 -31. 
 
Trifiletti, L. B., Gielen, A. C., Sleet, D. A., & Hopkins, K. (2005). Behavioural 
and social sciences t heories and models: are they being used in unintentional injury 
prevention research? Health Educational Research, 20,  298-307. 
 
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. (2006). Does changing behavioral intentions 
engender behavior change? A meta -analysis of experimental  evidence. Psychological 
Bulletin , 132, 249 -268. 
 
Wingwood, G. M., & DiClemente, R.  (1996 ). HIV sexual interventions for 
women: A  review. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 12 , 209 -217. 
 
Working Group on Recommendations for Repo rting of Clinical Tria ls in the  
Biomedical Literature (1994). Call for comments on a proposal to improve reporting 
of clinical trials in the biomedical literature. Working Group on Recommendations for 
Reporting of Clinical Trials in the Biomedical Literature. Annals of Interna l 
Medicine , 121, 894 -5. 
 21 
 
 
 22 
Table 1: Overview of Coding Scheme Development  
Stage  Basis for development  Development  
1 Need for an initial coding scheme.  Scheme 1 (10 items). Up to 6 response options per item. See text („Initial Development‟) for further det ails. 
2 Scheme 1 applied to 29 papers by the second 
author and a sub -set of papers by the first 
author. Discussion between authors.  Scheme 2 (15 items). Coding response options modified to yes/no/don‟t know for all items except those relating to 
measurem ent of, and change in, theoretical constructs (which were coded as all/some/none). Items added: 
Theory/constructs used to select recipients for the intervention; Theory/constructs used to tailor intervention 
techniques to recipients; item 5 from Scheme 1 s eparated into further items; Support for theory stated with/without 
appropriate mediation; Results used to refine theory. Concept of targeted predictors is introduced. Some items 
modified to aid clarity.  
3 Scheme 2 tested on 9 papers by both authors.  Scheme 3 (16 items). Item linking techniques to constructs separated into 2 items. Greater emphasis at this stage on 
the explicit use of theory cited within the paper. The term „post -intervention‟ added to the measurement and 
evaluation items. Theory -relevant  construct is defined.  
4 Discussion between the authors.  Scheme 4 (19 items). Problematic items omitted/simplified (each item coded as yes/no). The mark scheme is 
formulated such that there is 1 form for each entry/paper. At this stage, three items (rath er than two) reflected 
techniques -construct mapping. Items added that require coders to list the constructs a) targeted; b) measured; c) 
change following intervention.  
5 Scheme 4 applied to one paper by 1 author.  Scheme 5 (15 items). Items requiring cod ers to list constructs were merged with relevant items.  
6 Scheme 5 applied to one paper by both 
authors.  Scheme 6 (15 items). Instructions were included for the first time with a glossary of key terms (theory; theory -
relevant construct; predictors; inter vention techniques). Additional written information is provided for the three 
items reflecting the mapping of techniques to constructs. Mediation analysis item separated into multiple sub -items.  
7 Scheme 6 tested on 2 papers by three raters. 
Some disagre ement on 5 of the 15 items.  Scheme 7 (15 items). Diagrams added for the three items reflecting the mapping of techniques to constructs, 
definitions of key terms and item order were modified.  
8 Scheme 7 tested on 14 papers by two raters. Scheme 8 (15 items). Items refined according to rater feedback and kappa values.  
 23 
Six of the 15 item s yielded kappa <.70.  
9 Scheme 8 tested on 15 papers by two raters. 
Two of the 15 items yielded kappa <.70.  Scheme 9 (15 items). Items refined according to rater feedback an d kappa values.  
10 Scheme 9 tested on 15 papers by two raters. 
One of the 15 items yielded kappa <.70.  Scheme 10 (15 items). Item refined according to rater feedback and kappa values.  
11 Scheme 10 tested on 22 papers by two raters. 
All 15 items were rel iable.  Scheme 11 (15 items). Although scheme 10 was reliable, three items were modified slightly to aid clarity.  
12 Scheme 11 tested on 22 papers by new rater. 
All 15 items were reliable. Two items 
concerning construct -technique mapping 
needed.  Scheme 11b  (17 items). Two items (kappa >.80) added reflecting the degree to which constructs are targeted by 
specific techniques.  
13 Scheme 1 2 tested on 19 papers by two raters.  Scheme 12 (1 9 items). Items 12 and 14d revised, and items 1 3 and 14  added following r eviewer feedback. All 
kappas of new items were >= .64.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 24 
Table 2.Overview of Theory Coding Scheme   
Item  
No. and 
kappa  Item  Description  Yes/ 
No/ 
Don’t know  List with location  in paper (i.e. page 
number)  
 
1 
(1) Theory/model of 
behaviour mentioned  
 Models/theories that specify relations among variables, in 
order to explain  or predict behaviour (e.g., TPB, SCT, HBM) 
are mentioned, even if the intervention is not based on this 
theory    
2 
(.77)  Targeted construct 
mentioned as predictor 
of behaviour  
 („Targeted‟ construct refers to a psychological construct that 
the study intervention is hypothesised to change).  
Evidence that the psychological construct relates to 
(correlates/predicts/causes) behaviour should be presented 
within the introduction or meth od (rather than the 
Discussion).   Location of evidence that construct relates to 
behaviour:  
 
 
Location that  this predictor is targeted by the 
intervention:  
 
 
3 
(.70)  Intervention based on 
single theory  The intervention is based on a single theory (rathe r than a 
combination of theories or theory + predictors)    
4 
(.83)  Theory/ predictors used 
to select recipients for 
the intervention  Participants were screened/selected based on achieving a 
particular score/level on a theory -relevant construct/predictor   Construct (Theory)  
 Predictor  
5 
(.88)  Theory/ predictors used 
to select/develop 
intervention techniques  
 
 The intervention is explicitly based on a theory or predictor 
or combination of theories or predictors   
 
 Theory  Predictor  
6 
(.86)  Theory/ predicto rs used 
to tailor intervention 
techniques to recipients  The intervention differs for different sub -groups that vary on 
a psychological construct (e.g., stage of change) or predictor 
at baseline   
 
 
  Construct  Predictor  
7 
(1) All intervention 
techniques a re explicitly Each intervention technique is explicitly linked to at least one 
theory -relevant construct/predictor.   Construct (list links)  Predictor (list links)  
 25 
linked to at least one 
theory -relevant 
construct/ predictor  
 
 
 
 
8 
(.91)  At least one , but n ot all, 
of the intervention 
techniques are explicitly 
linked to at least one 
theory -relevant 
construct/ predictor  
 
 At least one, but not all, of the intervention techniques are 
explicitly linked to at least one theory -relevant construct/ 
predictor. 
 
  Construct (list links)  Predictor (list links)  
9 
(.74)  Group of techniques are 
linked to a group of 
constructs/ predictors  
 
 
 
 
 A cluster of techniques is linked to a cluster of constructs/ 
predictors.  
  List clusters of 
techniques/constructs  List clusters of  
techniques/predictors  
10 
(.80)  All theory -relevant 
constructs/predictors  are 
explicitly linked to at 
least one intervention 
technique  
 Every theoretical construct within a stated theory, or every 
stated predictor (see item 5), is linked to at least one 
intervention technique.   Construct (list links)  Predictor (list links)  
11 
(.90)  At least one , but not all, 
of the  theory relevant 
constructs/predictors are 
explicitly linked to at 
least one intervention 
technique  At least one, but not all, of the theore tical constructs within a 
stated theory or at least one, but not all, of the stated 
predictors (see item 5) are linked to at least one intervention 
technique.   Construct (list links)  Predictor (list links)  
 26 
  
12 
(1) Theory -relevant 
constructs/ predictors  
are measured   a) At least one construct of theory (or predictor) 
mentioned in relation to the intervention is measured 
POST -INTERVENTION.  
b) At least one construct of theory (or predictor) 
mentioned in relation to the intervention is measured 
PRE AND POST -INTERVEN TION.  
  Construct  Predictor  
13 
(a=.77)  
(b=.77)  
(c=1)  
(d=.64)  
(e=.89)  
(f=.76)  Quality of Measures  a) All of the measures of theory relevant 
constructs/predictors had some evidence for their 
reliability  
b) At least one, but not all, of the measures of theory 
relevant constructs/predictors had some evidence for 
their reliability  
c) All of the measures of theory relevant 
constructs/predictors have been previously validated  
d) At least one, but not all, of the measures of theory 
relevant constructs/predictors have been pre viously 
validated  
e) The behaviour measure had some evidence for its 
reliability  
f) The behaviour measure has been previously 
validated  
  Construct  Predictor  
14 
(all=1, 
except 
b=.73)  Randomization of 
participants to condition  a) Do the authors claim randomization?  
b) Is a method of random allocation to condition 
described (e.g., random number generator; coin 
toss)  
c) Was the success of randomization tested?  
d) Was the randomization successful (or baseline 
differences between intervention and control 
group statistically cont rolled)?  
    
15 
(1) Changes in measured 
theory -relevant The intervention leads to sig. change in at least one theory -
relevant construct/predictor (vs. control group) in favour of  Construct  Predictor  
 27 
constructs/ predictor  
 
 
 the intervention.  
16 
(1 for each 
sub- item)  Mediational analysis of 
construct/s / predictors  In addition to 14, do the following effects emerge?:  
 
a) Mediator predicts DV? (or change in mediator leads 
to change in DV)  
 
b) Mediator predicts DV (when controlling for IV)?  
 
c) Intervention does n ot predict DV (when controlling 
for mediator)?  
 
d) Mediated effect statistically significant ? 
  Construct  Predictor  
17 
(.72)  Results discussed in 
relation to theory  
 Results are discussed in terms of the theoretical basis of the 
intervention    
18 
(.78)  Appropriate support for 
theory  Support for the theory is based on appropriate mediation OR 
refutation of the theory is based on obtaining appropriate null 
effects (i.e. changing behaviour without changing the theory -
relevant constructs).  
    
19 
(1) Results u sed to refine 
theory  The authors attempt to refine the theory upon which the 
intervention was based by either: a) adding or removing 
constructs to the theory, or b) specifying that the 
interrelationships between the theoretical constructs should 
be changed  and spelling out which relationships should be 
changed   a) Constructs added or removed from theory:  
 
 
b) Interrelationships between the theoretical 
constructs to be changed:  
 
 
 
 28 
 
 29 
C1 
C2 T1 
T2 
T3 
T1 C1 
C2 
C3 C1 
C2 T1 
T2 
T3 C1 T1 
T2 
T3 
T1 
T2 C1 
C2 
C3 Item 7: Example: All intervention   Item 8: Example: At least one, but   
techniques (T) are linked to at least   not all, of the intervention techniques  
one theory -relevant construct/      (T) are linked to at least one theory - 
predictor (C)      relevant construct/predictor (C)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 9: Example: Group of    Item 10: Exampl e: All constructs  
techniques (T) are linked to a group   within a stated theory/all predictors  
of theory -relevant constructs/    (C) are linked to at least one  
predictors (C)      intervention technique (T)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Item 11: Example: At least one, but not  
all, of the constructs within a stated  
theory/stated predictors (C) are linked to  
at least one intervention technique (T)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 . Conceptual underpinnings of the coding scheme (numbers refer to coding 
scheme items)  
 30 
Theory/  
Constructs  
       1 Intervention  Participants  
Behaviour  
2, 3, 5, 7-11, 19 12-16 6 
17-19 4  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2 . Diagrammatic Representation of Coding Scheme: numbers refer to items  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 31 
Footnotes  
 
 1 The references for these pre -coded papers, and their associated cod es, are 
available upon request.  
 2 Available upon request.  
 
