Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: 1743-7199 (Print) 1743-7202 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Behaviour change theory and evidence: a
presentation to Government
Susan Michie & Robert West
To cite this article:  Susan Michie & Robert West (2013) Behaviour change theory and
evidence: a presentation to Government, Health Psychology Review, 7:1, 1-22, DOI:
10.1080/17437199.2011.649445
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2011.649445
Published online: 02 Feb 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 13804
View related articles 
Citing articles: 50 View citing articles 

Behaviour change theory and evidence: a presentation to Government
Susan Michiea* and Robert Westb
aDepartment of Psychology, University College London, London, UK;bDepartment of
Epidemiology and Public Health, University College London, London, UK
(Received 24 August 2011; ﬁnal version received 10 December 2011 )
This review presents a case study of Government policy in relation to behaviour
change and suggests ways of strengthening it by drawing on theoretical andempirical approaches from health psychology. It aims to inform policy-makers
and politicians about the value of behavioural science, and to provide
psychologists with an example of engagement with Government. It is based ontwo Health Psychology submissions to the 2010 UK House of Lords’ Science andTechnology Select Committee inquiry into Behaviour Change. The Inquiry
examined current knowledge about what interventions can effectively influence
behaviour, how behaviour change interventions can be used to achieve policygoals and what factors should be taken into account by government indetermining whether a particular behaviour change intervention is appropriate.
The review critiques current UK Government thinking about behaviour change
and presents a number of linked frameworks for determining which behaviourchange interventions and policies it would be sensible to research and implement.
These include the COM-B system, a systems approach to understanding
behaviour in context; the PRIME Theory of motivation; the Behaviour ChangeWheel, including a comprehensive listing of intervention functions and policylevers; and behaviour change techniques. We end with considerations of
intervention development, effectiveness and cost-effectiveness.
Keywords: behaviour change; behaviour change theory; behaviour change
interventions; evidence-based policy; ‘Nudge’; theory; government policy
Introduction
In 2010, the UK House of Lords’ Science and Technology Select Committee
launched a wide-ranging inquiry into Behaviour Change and called for evidence from
the national and international scientific and policy communities and beyond (www.
parliament.uk/documents/lords-committees/science-technology/behaviourchange/CfEBehaviourChange.pdf). To our knowledge, this is the first such exercise by any
national legislative body. The evidence was received by a panel of 12 peers with
expertise in science, ethics and policy; the expert advisor to the panel was a healthpsychologist. Whilst the submissions could be on any aspect of behaviour change, the
great majority of the 150 or so submissions concerned health.
The context for the inquiry was as follows:
To meet many of the societal challenges we are currently facing /C1such as achieving an
80 percent reduction in carbon emissions by 2050 or reducing the burden on the health
*Email: s.michie@ucl.ac.ukHealth Psychology Review, 2013
Vol. 7, No. 1, 1 /C122, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2011.649445
#2013 Taylor & Francis
service as a result of smoking, drinking or the rise in obesity /C1individual and collective
behaviour will need to change significantly .... The inquiry will examine our current
state of knowledge about what interventions can effectively influence behaviour, howbehaviour change interventions which have been designed on the basis of thatknowledge can be used to achieve policy goals, and what factors should be taken into
account by government in determining whether a particular behaviour change
intervention is appropriate.
The select committee set out to investigate, amongst other things, the policy
implications of recent developments in research on behaviour change, whethercurrent UK government behaviour change interventions are evidence-based and
subject to appropriate evaluation, the relationship between government, industry and
the voluntary sector in promoting behaviour change and the social and ethical issuessurrounding the use of behaviour change interventions by government. This article isbased on two health psychology submissions (Michie & West, 2010; West & Michie,2010) one of which was invited as part of expert witness evidence to the Inquiry. Itaddresses five of the 16 questions posed by the Inquiry: What is known about howbehaviour can be influenced? What should be classified as a behaviour changeintervention? How should different levels of intervention (individual, organisational,
community and national) and different types of intervention (legislative, fiscal,
educative) interact in order to achieve policy goals more effectively? Shouldbehaviour change interventions be used in isolation or in combination with otherpolicy interventions? What are the policy implications of recent developments inresearch on behaviour change?
We begin this review with a critique of current UK Government thinking about
behaviour change and then propose an agenda for designing theory-based behaviourchange interventions of interest to policy-makers and for systematically developing
the science base and technology of behaviour change. This includes brief summaries of:
(1) The COM-B system: a systems approach to understanding behaviour in
context.
(2) The PRIME Theory of motivation which draws together into a single coherent
model the broad range of motivational processes, from drives and impulses toanalysis and self-conscious decision making.
(3) The Behaviour Change Wheel (BCW) which includes a comprehensive listing
of categories of intervention functions and the policy levers that may be used
to enact these.
(4) Taxonomies of behaviour change techniques (BCTs) which form the compo-
nents of behaviour change interventions.
(5) We end with considerations of intervention development, effectiveness and
cost-effectiveness.
The UK Government’s approach to behaviour change
The UK coalition Government has declared its intention of avoiding coercive
interventions or those that impose ‘bureaucratic restrictions ’on individuals or
industry, and has established a ‘Behavioural Insight Team ’to help them achieve this.
Its work is illustrated in the following response to a House of Lords parliamentaryquestion (emphases ours):2 S. Michie and R. West
Asked by Lord Bassam of Brighton
To ask Her Majesty ’s Government how many staff are employed in the Behavioural
Insight Team in the Cabinet Office; what are their terms of reference; to whom they
report; to whom they are accountable; and when they are expected to complete theirwork programme. [HL3958]
Lord Taylor of Holbeach: ‘The Behavioural Insights Team has seven full-time staff.
Their terms of reference are to develop more cost-effective and less bureaucratic ways of
changing behaviour in ways that give citizens and communities greater control of their
own lives. They will achieve this in three ways. First, by proactively developing ideas for
achieving behavioural change using less bureaucratic methods across a wide range of
government policy and activity. In this mode the team will actively seek out areas wherebehavioural science applications could be usefully applied. Secondly, by pursuing non-
bureaucratic and non-coercive alternatives to regulation. And thirdly, by creating and
facilitating alliances and partnerships between government, business, media and thethird sector to deliver and activate the ideas developed above. ’
The emphasis on the virtue of ‘non-bureaucratic ’(rather than, say, ‘effective ’)
interventions reflects the Government ’s underlying philosophy that eschews explicit
regulation and promotes behaviour change by more subtle means such as priming
and framing, social norm feedback, default options, incentivisation and environ-
mental cues. The Behavioural Insight Team draws heavily on a book called ‘Nudge ’:
Improving Decisions About Health, Wealth and Happiness ’(Thaler & Sunstein,
2008). Common parlance includes ‘nudge thinking ’,‘nudge interventions ’,‘nudge
policies ’and even ‘nudge theory ’.‘Nudge ’is defined as ‘any aspect of the ‘choice
architecture ’that alters people ’s behaviour in a predictable way without forbidding
any options or significantly changing their economic incentives ’. This is put forward
as the ‘third way ’between libertarianism and paternalism. Libertarian paternalists
‘want to make it easy for people to go their own way; they do not want to burden
those who want to exercise their freedom ’(p. 5). . ...‘Libertarian paternalism is a
relatively weak, soft, and nonintrusive type of paternalism because choices are not
blocked, fenced off, or significantly burdened. If people want to smoke cigarettes, toeat a lot of candy, to choose an unsuitable health care plan, or to fail to save for
retirement, libertarian paternalists will not force them to do otherwise /C1or even
make things hard for them ’(p. 6).
Eschewing other potentially more powerful interventions does not take into
account the conflicting interests in society: one person ’s‘freedom ’is another person ’s
burden e.g. the ‘freedom ’to smoke extends the years of illness and disability for which
the smoker requires others to care for them; the ‘freedom ’to make potentially harmful
food attractive maximises profit for the food industry. Many large corporations haveno qualms about using more directive, coercive and powerful methods of shaping our
behaviours. The most striking example is cigarettes which besides containing an
addictive drug, nicotine, are engineered to maximise the impact of this drug in terms ofspeed of delivery and potent conditioned stimuli (Rabinoff, Caskey, Rissling, & Park,
2007). Gaming machines use sophisticated operant conditioning techniques to
maximise behaviour rate. The food industry engineers its products, for example withlarge amounts of hidden salt, to maximise immediate taste appeal (Magriplis et al.,
2011). The alcohol industry uses sophisticated marketing techniques tapping into core
aspects of identity to attract people to its products (Anderson, 2009).Health Psychology Review 3
The ‘nudge ’doctrine also discounts the duty of the state, in a democracy, to
protect its citizens from the harmful effects of such manipulation; protection mayrequire regulation, service provision, legislation and fiscal measures which researchfindings have shown the public happy to accept (Bassi, 2010; Maryon-Davis & Jolley,2010; Y ouGov, 2010).
Advocates of ‘nudge ’argue for a collaboration between government and the
market ‘to steer people ’s choices in directions that will improve their lives ’. Of note is
reference to the notion of choice rather than to behaviour. This is based on theerroneous assumption that the behaviours that harm people ’s health are exclusively
the result of choice, and that impulses driven by instinct and past associations thatdo not involve reflective analysis do not play a significant role in shaping behaviour.Thus, while the book makes much of cognitive biases, these are all considered towork through a process of reflective option selection and not as part of the flow ofbehaviour that is undertaken without self-awareness. Due weight is not given to thepowerful associative learning influences that interact with drives and emotions. Anexample of the lack of attention to the role of context and impulse-driven motivationin shaping behaviour is ‘in many cases, people make pretty bad decisions /C1decisions
they would not have made if they had paid full attention and possessed completeinformation, unlimited cognitive abilities, and complete self-control ’(p. 6). Even if
people had all these resources and had made a decision to behave in a healthyfashion, influences such as associative learning, widely used by the advertisingindustry, will serve to push people off their chosen path.
A consideration of the effectiveness of ‘nudge interventions ’within the existing
UK public health environment that is shaped largely by industry suggests that the
evidence, where it exists, shows little or no effect (Marteau, Ogilvie, Roland, Suhrcke,& Kelly, 2011).
The ‘nudge ’approach pre-judges the key issues that should be considered in
designing intervention strategy. Interventions need to be affordable, practicable andpublicly acceptable but if they are not effective these count for nothing. There is nosubstitute for a rigorous evaluation of the evidence and a systematic analysis of thebehaviour in context in the light of that evidence. If a government turns its back oninterventions that evidence clearly shows are likely to be effective and which areaffordable, practicable and carry public support, and instead they back interventionsthat derive from inconclusive evidence that is tangentially related to the behaviour atissue but fits with a particular doctrine, human lives may be lost in their thousands.
Also missing is a consideration of the context of the harm posed by behaviour;
the central role that the notion of harm should play in intervention selection isarticulated by the Nuffield Council on Bioethics in its Ladder of Interventions andstewardship model (Nuffield Council on Bioethics, 2007). The ‘nudge ’approach
forswears ‘banning ’activities and yet no rational thinker could imagine that, were
cigarettes to be invented today, they should be permitted for sale. The fact that theharms they cause were only discovered recently has led to an anomalous situation inwhich governments concerned about public health have been forced to use otherinterventions such as education and persuasion to limit that harm, and every attemptto go further has been vigorously opposed by a hugely influential and wealthyindustry that uses the fact that its products are legal as a key defence.
The ‘nudge ’doctrine is not adequate to deal with the behaviour change challenges
facing society. It does not engage in a systematic analysis to determine likely4 S. Michie and R. West
intervention effectiveness, and allows political values to influence judgements about
other criteria such as effectiveness and public acceptability. The political valuesunderpinning adoption of the ‘nudge ’doctrine are revealed by the fact it is favoured
in cases where major industries, such as the alcohol and food industries, fear theymay lose business, but not in cases where there are no major industry stakeholders.For example, the new stimulant drug ‘mephedrone ’was quickly banned even though
the harms to users and society appear to be substantially less than from tobacco or
alcohol. Coercive policies are also favoured with regard to getting people off sickness
and unemployment benefit and forcing drug-users by court order into treatmentprogrammes.
The arena of behaviour change where the Government favours ‘nudge ’is one that
does not involve a level playing field. Since industry can and does use interventionsthat go well beyond ‘nudge ’to influence the behaviour of consumers, a socially
responsible behaviour change strategy needs to take account of the fact that all ourbehaviours are subject to powerful manipulation by companies through marketingand product design. The tobacco, gambling, ‘fast food ’and alcohol industries spend
many millions of pounds and dollars exploiting our psychology to sell their products.If governments eschew interventions that protect us against this, ‘choices ’are not
free/C1they are dictated by commercial exploitation. An example of how industry uses
the vast resources at its disposal to influence consumer behaviour is Coca Cola ’s
spend on advertising, estimated at $2.44 billion in 2009 (http://www.adbrands.net/us/cocacola_us.htm).
It may be noted that, like Odysseus who instructed the crew of his ship to tie him
to the mast and to block their own ears with wax so that they would not be lured bythe song of the sirens to steer the ship on to the rocks, the public will often supportcoercive or restrictive interventions that prevent them succumbing to temptation. Forexample, a large-scale survey of adults in Britain found that 77% supported gettingrid of cigarette vending machines completely, 73% wanted tobacco put out of sight inshops and 67% supported banning TV advertising of junk food before 9 pm(Y ouGov, 2010). There is also widespread approval even among smokers of the use oftax increases as a way of curtailing smoking behaviour (Gardner & West, 2011) andalmost half the adult population of England would even support a total ban on saleof cigarettes (Shahab & West, 2011).
‘Nudge ’is an ideologically driven doctrine, the application of which will result in
poor policy decisions with respect to health behaviour change. It should be replacedwith a systematic evidence-based approach to selecting interventions and determin-ing policy. It is recognised that values should shape and constrain behavioural
interventions. The criticism of the ‘nudge ’doctrine is that it does so from a narrow
political perspective rather than a broader societal one. Thus it rules outinterventions that most members of society would be happy to accept if they wereexplained. Rather than starting from a restricted range of intervention options,Government should give systematic and comprehensive consideration to the range ofinterventions that may be applicable to determine its behaviour change strategies. Wepresent such an approach aimed to be usable by psychologists and policy-makersalike. The starting point is an analysis of the behaviour to be changed whichconceptualises behaviour as a system incorporating context (the COM-B system).For example, understanding physical activity must take into account weather, localgeography and availability of facilities, and GP advice to stop smoking is veryHealth Psychology Review 5
different in contexts where GPs can provide free medication or refer to a behavioural
support programme than when these options are not available.
This analysis is linked to an evidence-based method for selecting amongst a
comprehensive, systematically organised and theoretically grounded range of
intervention options (the BCW). The selected interventions can, in turn, be linked
to specific BCTs and general policies to support their delivery in a way that issensitive to specific contexts.
A model of behaviour in context: the COM-B System
Applying the principle of parsimony, we sought to identify the simplest overarching
model needed to account for change in a behaviour. By behaviour, we mean ‘anything
a person does in response to internal or external events. Actions may be overt (motor
or verbal) and directly measurable, or covert (activities not viewable e.g. physiolo-
gical responses) and indirectly measurable; behaviours are physical events that occur
in the body and are controlled by the brain ’(Hobbs, Campbell, Hildon, & Michie,
2011). We drew on two sources representing very different traditions: a US consensusmeeting of behavioural theorists in 1991 (Fishbein et al., 2001), and a principle of US
criminal law dating back many centuries. The former identified three factors that
were necessary and sufficient conditions for the performance of a specified volitional
behaviour: the skills necessary to perform the behaviour, a strong intention to
perform the behaviour and no environmental constraints that make it impossible to
perform the behaviour. In US criminal law, it is recognised that for a defendant to be
found guilty of a criminal act three conditions must be present: means/capability,motive and opportunity (Means, motive, and opportunity, 2011). Logic dictates that
this can be extended to any action. This provides the starting point for a
comprehensive framework for understanding behaviour: as a system of interacting
elements as shown in Figure 1. The arrows represent potential for causal inference.
Thus, capability, motivation and opportunity are all necessary conditions for a given
behaviour, the behaviour can influence all three of these and capability and
opportunity can both influence motivation.
We can divide each of the sources of behaviour into two types. Capability can be
either physical (in the case of physical skills, physical strength, etc.) or psychological (in
the case of psychological resources and skills, knowledge, capacity for understanding
Figure 1. The COM-B system: a framework for understanding behaviour.6 S. Michie and R. West
etc.). For motivation, reflective (involving self-conscious planning, analysis and
decision-making) and automatic processes (involving emotional reactions, drives andhabits) play a role. In the case of opportunity, it is possible to distinguish between whatis afforded by the physical environment (resources, locations, physical barriers, etc.)
and the social environment (concepts available in language, exposure to ideas, etc.).
This model provides a basis for specifying what drives and enables behaviour
patterns and individual behaviours. It is thus a model of behaviour per se , and
provides the basis for a model of behaviour change. It puts the nature of thebehaviour to be changed at its core: a COM-B analysis of the behaviour has directimplications for the types of intervention likely to be effective. A systematic, theory-based approach to intervention design would be to identify the nature of the desiredchange and then systematically consider each of the components that would be
necessary, practicable and acceptable to achieve that change.
In the case of health-related behaviour, it is apparent that motivation in its
broadest sense lies at its heart. Thus smokers are physically capable of not lightingup, excessive drinkers are physically able to abstain and so on. Motivation is notsimply a matter of reflective choice; a COM-B analysis requires an understanding ofhow reflective and automatic motivation interact to determine behaviour. There are anumber of models that have begun to explore this (e.g. Strack & Deutsch, 2004) butone in particular explicitly seeks to bring together the full range of motivational
constructs into a single coherent model.
PRIME Theory of motivation
Motivation is central to the generation of behaviour. Given all the things that we are
capable of doing and that we have the opportunity to do, motivation determineswhat we actually do and how we do it. Motivation goes beyond reason and choice toall the psychological and physiological processes that energise and direct our
behaviour, including biological drives, emotions and habits (Mook, 1995). There has
been a tendency in recent years to focus on reflective aspects of motivation at theexpense of automatic aspects that have long been known to be important (Mook,1995). Those that have focused on automatic processes have often not recognisedimportant distinctions within these processes (Keren & Schul, 2009). For example,within operant conditioning there is evidence of an important distinction betweenthe learning of stimulus-impulse associations (habit) and associations betweenstimuli and anticipation of pleasure or avoidance of discomfort (goal-directed
behaviour)(Skinner, 1953).
A comprehensive theory that represents the structure of human motivation as a
number of levels is PRIME Theory (West, 2006) (see Figure 2), with PRIMEstanding for Plans, Responses, Impulses/inhibition, Motives and Evaluations.According to this theory, ‘higher ’levels of motivation have evolved later than lower
levels and provide greater flexibility of response, but crucially are only able toinfluence behaviour by acting as stimuli to lower levels. Higher levels of motivationpermit both greater flexibility of responding and anticipation of future events. Thus
reflex responses are the lowest level and simply involve organisation of a response in
response to a stimulus. Impulses and counter-impulses allow for immediate stimuliwith the strongest motivational force to control behaviour. Motives/desires allow forgoal-directed behaviour to the extent that possible futures can be imagined.Health Psychology Review 7
Evaluations allow for goal-directed behaviour where goals can be communicated
through language and derived from inference and analysis. Plans allow for
behaviours to be deferred according to priorities or anticipated opportunity or
threat.
Thus what we believe to be good or bad can only influence our actions if our
beliefs make us want or need things at the relevant moment. Similarly, what we
intend to do at one time can only direct what we actually do if the intention is
remembered and generates sufficiently strong wants or needs in the moment to
overcome competing wants and needs from the immediate environment. In summary,
wants and needs compete at each moment for control over our actions and these are
under strong stimulus control as a result of past associative learning, and currentdrives and emotional states.
Previous models of health-related behaviour have considered only a limited
number of ways in which change occurs. A great deal of attention is focused on
communication and inferential reasoning but associative learning is also crucial, asare many other processes (see Table 1).
PRIME Theory notes that the motivational system is fundamentally ‘chaotic ’
which means that small triggers can have large effects, and change can be sudden or
gradual or involve a long period of apparently random switching between states.
Approaches such as the ‘stages of change ’model that propose an orderly transition
in behaviour change, only account for a small proportion of instances of behaviour
Figure 2. The structure of human motivation in PRIME Theory.
Note: Plans are self-conscious intentions to perform an action in the future. Beliefs are
propositions that are held to be true. Wants and needs are imagined futures to which are
attached anticipated pleasure/satisfaction and relief from mental or physical discomfortrespectively. Impulses are organised action schemas, and counter impulses are inhibitory
countervailing processes. Responses involve initiating, modifying or stopping an action. The
internal environment involves an ever-changing ﬂux of emotional states, drive states, imagesand cognitive schemata. The external environment involves stimuli impacting on the sense
organs. Reﬂective processes involve self-conscious information processing. Automatic
processes do not require conscious awareness although their results may be the object ofreﬂection and form part of ongoing experience.8 S. Michie and R. West
change and can lead to inappropriate interventions (West, 2005). In the field of
smoking, for example, many smokers who appear not to be ready to stop will
respond favourably to an offer of help and will go on to become ex-smokers, contrary
to what would be expected from the ‘stages of change ’model (Pisinger, Vestbo,
Borch-Johnsen, & Jorgensen, 2005).
PRIME Theory further notes that, as a result of self-awareness, we as humans
develop mental representations of ourselves about which we have strong feelings.
These ‘identities ’are a very important source of wants and needs which give stability
to behaviour patterns; in many cases, a change in identity is a fundamental driver of
behaviour change. This has been cited as important in recovery from drug addiction
(White, 2004), and is cited as a major factor underlying spontaneous recovery and
forms part of the treatment approach offered by organisations such as Alcoholics
Anonymous which is widely used in many countries (Kaskutas, 2009). Self-control
involves a domination of reflective over automatic processes and this requires
psychological skills, mental energy (a finite resource) and efficient downward
connections between parts of the brain involved in reflective processes and the
automatic channels through which they must operate.
Thus, fundamental tenets of PRIME Theory are, first, that at every moment we
act in pursuit of what we most ‘want ’(anticipating pleasure or satisfaction) or ‘need ’
(anticipating relief from mental or physical discomfort) at that moment. Second,
these are feelings and we do not have to verbalise them (even internally) for them to
influence our actions. Also, third, beliefs about what is good or bad and preformed
plans (reflective processes) can only influence our actions if they generate sufficiently
strong wants or needs at the relevant moment to overcome competing wants or needs
arising from more direct sources such as past associations and drive states. Our
identities are a very important source of wants and needs and can often be key to
achieving lasting behaviour change. Self-control is fundamental to much behaviour
change and to facilitate this it is necessary to develop psychological capabilities as
well as motivation to change, and to provide an environment conducive to this. Stress
and other psychological demands deplete reserves of mental energy and make itTable 1. Elementary processes of change in human motivation; items 1 /C112 may be thought of
as‘automatic ’while items 13 /C115 form part of ‘reﬂective ’information processing.
1. Maturation: Changes associated with growing older
2. Habituation: Decrease in response with exposure
3. Sensitisation: Increase in response with exposure4. Chemical ‘Insult ’: Pharmacological responses
5. Physical ‘Insult ’: Brain lesions
6. Associative learning: Operant and classical conditioning7. Imitation: Direct copying8. Perception: Acquiring information from the senses
9. Identification: Forming one ’s own identity from perceptions of others
10. Consistency disposition: Generation of motives, ideas from similar ones11. Dissonance avoidance: Negating or blocking uncomfortable thoughts
12. Objectification: Generating evaluations from likes and dislikes
13. Assimilation: Acquiring information via communication14. Inference: Induction and deduction
15. Analysis: Formal and informal calculationHealth Psychology Review 9
harder for individuals to exercise self-control. The concept of mental energy has been
operationalised and studied, but as yet does not have a clear physiological substrateand so can best be considered as a ‘metaphor ’.
PRIME Theory provides a broad conceptualisation of motivation and its
influences that can help to develop interventions designed to change health-related
behaviours. Concepts developed in COM-B and PRIME Theory have been linkedwith a comprehensive classification of intervention functions and policy categories toform a theoretically based system for developing behaviour change interventions.This is discussed in the following section.
A system for classifying interventions: the Behaviour Change Wheel (BCW)
A behaviour change intervention is a co-ordinated set of activities designed to change
specified behaviour patterns. Usually these behaviour patterns are measured in termsof the prevalence or incidence of particular behaviours in specified populations (e.g.prevalence of tobacco smoking or incidence of delivery of brief advice from aphysician to stop smoking).
When designing or evaluating behaviour change interventions, one needs to begin
with a comprehensive analysis of what is driving the current behaviour pattern and
the available intervention and policy options. This requires an overarching model of
behaviour, and within that of human motivation, and a way of linking this to make a
selection from among the full panoply of intervention and policy options. Thisapproach contrasts with one which takes an idea, such as ‘nudge ’(Thaler & Sunstein,
2008) and attempts to apply it as a doctrine, thus neglecting all those interventionstrategies that come from a different perspective. It also contrasts with frameworks incommon use by the UK Government, such as MINDSPACE (Institute forGovernment, 2010), that are not comprehensive in that they do not cover allpossible intervention types. Neither are they coherent in the sense of using categories
that are mutually exclusive and at similar conceptual levels.
We describe a classification system developed on the basis of a systematic review
of previous frameworks, with a clear goal of being (1) comprehensive, (2) coherentand (3) based on an overarching model of behaviour (Michie, van Stralen, & West,2011). It is a starting point for systematically developing the science base in this areaand a behaviour change technology.
The BCW takes the concepts developed in PRIME Theory and COM-B and
applies them to directing the choice of intervention functions and from there to
policy categories needed to enact those interventions. The distinction between
intervention functions and policy categories is illustrated by examples. A COM-Banalysis may determine that there is a requirement to educate particular sectors ofthe population about the substantially increased risk of Type-II diabetes with evenmoderate overweight. Thus, the intervention function is ‘education ’. It then has to
determine what policies would be appropriate to deliver this. It may be ‘Commu-
nications/marketing ’(for example with a TV campaign), or ‘Service delivery ’(for
example, by primary healthcare staff giving brief advice to all patients who are
overweight). In a second example, consider that it is decided that an important
intervention function to reduce excessive alcohol consumption would be ‘environ-
mental restructuring ’in which there was reduced exposure to certain kinds of
manipulative promotion by alcohol producers. Depending on the circumstances, it10 S. Michie and R. West
may be decided that this could be achieved through voluntary ‘regulation ’or it may
require ‘legislation ’. A striking example of the difference between governmental
policies that have been largely evidence-based and derived from a comprehensiveanalysis of the options and those that have been dominated by political ideology or
pandering to commercial interests is tobacco versus alcohol.
The BCW is marked out from other intervention classifications by its explicit
linkage to a comprehensive understanding of behaviour and motivation. It is alsomarked out by the fact that the identification of intervention functions and policycategories was arrived at by a systematic literature search for pre-existing classificationsystems. This identified 19 frameworks of behaviour change (Michie, van Stralen, &West, 2011). Such a comprehensive list is crucial because, unless interventiondesigners and policy-makers can see the full set of options available for achieving
behaviour change, they are likely to overlook some that could be particularly
effective. An analysis of these frameworks revealed nine broad functions ofinterventions and seven categories of supporting policies.
Merely listing the intervention and policy options can be useful as a reminder of
ones that would otherwise be missed. However, the BCW goes beyond that. It formsthe basis for a scientific analysis of how to make the selection. This is based on aCOM-B analysis of the target behaviour, along with key principles of likelyeffectiveness, affordability, ethical acceptability, public acceptability and capacity
to be implemented within the current context.
The BCW classification system shows where doctrines such as ‘nudge ’fit within
the broad framework of behaviour change and the a-priori limits they impose onintervention options. It also provides an analysis of the behaviour itself in relation tothe potential interventions and policies for change. The BCW is illustrateddiagrammatically in Figure 3 and definitions with examples are listed in Table 2.
An intervention strategy is a selection of intervention functions and policies to
enact or support these. Choice of intervention strategy only takes one so far in
attempting to change behaviour. Even the appropriate mix of intervention functions
is no guarantee of success. It is necessary to go to a more fine grained analysis of thespecific BCTs that make up the interventions.
Delivering interventions: behaviour change techniques (BCTs)
Each intervention function involves one or more specific BCTs. BCTs are irreducible
activities designed to achieve behaviour change (Michie, Abraham et al., 2011;
Michie, Johnston, Francis, Hardeman, & Eccles, 2008). Taxonomies of such
techniques that can be reliably used for specifying interventions have been developedin relation to key behaviours related to health: smoking (Michie, Churchill, & West,2011; Michie, Hyder, Walia, & West, 2011; West, Walia, Hyder, Shahab, & Michie,2010), excessive alcohol use (Michie et al., in press), physical inactivity and unhealthyeating (Abraham & Michie, 2008; Michie, Ashford et al., 2011; Michie et al., 2008).Interventions may comprise many individual BCTs and the same BCT may beevident across several interventions.
An example of applying an analysis of interventions based on BCTs comes from
the UK ’s NHS Centre for Smoking Cessation and Training (NCSCT: www.ncsct.co.
uk), an academic-health service partnership. Analysing the enabling function of theStop-Smoking Services by BCT has identified the specific activities of its serviceHealth Psychology Review 11
provision that are associated with better success rates in their clients (West et al.,
2010). Out of 43 BCTs identified, a set of core ones were found to differentiate more
successful from less successful services (see Table 3). These cover the range ofprocesses described in PRIME Theory. For example, advising smokers on changingtheir routines helps to avoid impulses to smoke in the presence of smoking cues.Measuring expired-air carbon monoxide concentrations provides a strong image tosmokers of the harm from smoking and the immediate gains from stopping thatmakes smokers feel positive about abstinence. Advising on stop smoking medicationsallows smokers to make best use of those medications and so reduce the acquired
drive to smoke when nicotine concentrations in the brain are depleted and they
experience learned impulses to smoke. Helping smokers achieve an ex-smokeridentity enables them to put firm barriers around their behaviour so that smoking is‘not an option ’at any time, just as it would be if they were in a supermarket. There is
much more work to be done on BCTs and their links with interventions and thenature of the target behaviour, but a start has been made.
The BCW is currently being developed into a theory- and evidence-based tool
allowing a range of users to design and select interventions and policies according to
an analysis of the nature of the behaviour, the mechanisms that need to be changed in
order to bring about behaviour change, the interventions and policies required tochange those mechanisms and the BCTs required to deliver them.
Developing an effective intervention strategy
An effective ‘intervention strategy ’will involve a combination of intervention
functions, enacted using policies identified using criteria such as effectiveness, cost,
Figure 3. The Behaviour Change Wheel: a system for selecting interventions and policies from
an analysis of behaviour.12 S. Michie and R. West
Table 2. The Behaviour Change Wheel: interventions and policies.
Level within BCW Definition of intervention/policy Examples
Interventions
Education Increasing knowledge or
understandingProviding information to
promote healthy eating
Persuasion Using communication to induce
positive or negative feelings or
stimulate actionUsing imagery to motivate
increases in physical activity
Incentivisation Creating expectation of reward Using vouchers to motivate
smoking cessation
Coercion Creating expectation of
punishment or costRaising the financial cost to
reduce excessive alcoholconsumption
Training Imparting skills Advanced driver training to
increase safe driving
Restriction Using rules to reduce the
opportunity to engage in the target
behaviour (or to increase the target
behaviour by reducing theopportunity to engage in
competing behaviours)Prohibiting sales of solvents to
people under 18 to reduce use for
intoxication
Environmental
restructuringChanging the physical or social
contextProviding on-screen prompts for
GPs to ask about smoking
behaviour
Modelling Providing an example for people to
aspire to or imitateUsing TV drama scenes involving
safe-sex practices to increase
condom use
Enablement Increasing means/reducing barriers
to increase capability beyondeducation and trainingBehavioural support for smoking
cessation, medication forcognitive deficits, surgery to
reduce obesity, prostheses to
promote physical activity
Policies
Communication/
marketingUsing print, electronic, telephonic
or broadcast mediaConducting mass media
campaigns
Guidelines Creating documents that
recommend or mandate practice.This includes all changes to service
provisionProducing and disseminating
treatment protocols
Fiscal Using the tax system to reduce or
increase the financial costIncreasing duty or increasing
anti-smuggling activities
Regulation Establishing rules or principles of
behaviour or practiceEstablishing voluntary
agreements on advertising
Legislation Making or changing laws Prohibiting sale or useEnvironmental/
social planningDesigning and/or controlling the
physical or social environment‘Traffic-calming ’measures; use of
prompts and reminders
Service provision Delivering a service Establishing support services in
workplaces, communities etc.Health Psychology Review 13
practicability and acceptability. Of these criteria, effectiveness is clearly a necessary
condition.
A crucial lesson from the accumulated evidence in many different areas is that
what is effective for a given behaviour, delivered in a particular way, in a given target
group and a given context may not be effective for other behaviours, target groups,
etc. The only way to be sure that a proposed intervention strategy in a given contextwill be effective is to try it and evaluate it. The choice of strategy to implement
and evaluate should be based on the best available relevant evidence coupled with a
sound understanding of the underlying principles. A theoretical understanding of
behaviour and behaviour change, and previous research evaluating specific
interventions are crucial in designing intervention strategies that stand a better
chance of success, or in ruling out strategies that are unlikely to be effective (Craig
et al., 2008).
Using theory to design an intervention strategy is helpful and recommended
(Craig et al., 2008; Michie et al., 2008). This requires:
(1) an understanding of the nature of the behaviour to be changed and the
context. We have proposed a model that analyses the behaviour in terms of‘capability ’,‘motivation ’and ‘opportunity ’; these are necessary conditions for
the new behaviour pattern to emerge and point to where the deficiency
currently lies. This allows one to determine what needs to change in order for
the behavioural target to be achieved;
(2) a system for considering the full panoply of possible intervention functions
and identifying which are likely to be effective to bring about the necessaryTable 3. Behaviour change techniques found to be associated with higher carbon-monoxidea
veriﬁed success rates in the NHS Stop Smoking Services.
Addressing capability
Facilitate relapse prevention and coping
Advise on stop-smoking medicationAsk about experiences of stop smoking medication that the client is using
Advise on conserving mental resources
Addressing motivation
Strengthen ex-smoker identityMeasure expired-air CO (and use as a motivational tool)
Provide reward (e.g. praise) contingent on abstinence
Boost motivation and self-efficacyProvide reassurance
Addressing opportunity
Advise on changing routineAdvise on/facilitate use of social support
Supporting other behaviour change techniques
Elicit client viewsGive options for additional or later support
Summarise information/confirm client decisions
Use reflective listening
aCarbon monoxide testing is used to check smokers ’reports of abstinence. The concentration in expired
air, as with a breathalyser, give an accurate indication of the concentration in the blood which in turn givesa good index of cigarette smoke intake over preceding hours.14 S. Michie and R. West
change identified above. Further details of this approach are available in
Michie et al. (2011b).;
(3) a method for designing the intervention strategy. Candidate intervention
functions are selected on the basis of the analysis at (i), and relevant evidence
of effective interventions and component BCTs. Relevant evidence should be
searched systematically rather than ‘cherry picked ’.
When it comes to using previous research to design an intervention strategy, the
best starting point is to look for relevant systematic reviews. Two very good sourcesfor these in domains related to health are the Cochrane Library (www.thecochra-nelibrary.com) and National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence (NICE)guidance documents (www.nice.org.uk). NICE has written generic guidance on
behaviour change interventions (Abraham, Kelly, West, & Michie, 2009; National
Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence, 2007). Because it was constrained by itsbrief not to go into specific examples, the guidance was necessarily general and couldbe seen as promoting ‘motherhood and apple pie ’. However, careful inspection of the
guidance will reveal important guiding principles that are rarely adopted in practice;if they were, a great deal of public money would be saved on repeated promulgationof ineffective intervention strategies.
There were 11 key psychological targets (which address both ‘reflective ’and
‘automatic ’aspects of human motivation) identified:
(1) Knowledge and outcome expectancies (helping people to develop accurate
knowledge about the health consequences of their behaviours).
(2) Personal relevance (emphasising the personal salience of health behaviours,
that is, what the consequences mean for individuals).
(3) Positive affective attitudes (promoting positive feelings towards the outcomes
of behaviour change).
(4) Descriptive norms (promoting the visibility of positive health behaviours in
people ’s reference groups /C1that is, the groups they compare themselves with,
or aspire to).
(5) Subjective norms (enhancing social approval for positive health behaviours in
significant others and reference groups).
(6) Personal and moral norms (promoting personal and moral commitments to
behaviour change).
(7) Self-efficacy (enhancing people ’s belief in their ability to change).
(8) Intention/goal setting and the formation of concrete plans (helping people to
form plans and goals in graded steps, over time and in specific contexts,including making if-then plans and developing appropriate coping strate-gies).
(9) Behavioural contracts (inviting people to commit to their plans with others)
(10) Social relationships (helping people recognise how their social contexts and
relationships may affect their behaviour).
(11) Relapse prevention (helping people to develop skills to cope with difficult
situations and conflicting goals once they have initiated change).
A general conclusion of this NICE guidance was that the most effective interventions
were those that acted simultaneously at several levels. An example of integratingHealth Psychology Review 15
different levels and types of intervention in relation to a policy goal following the
outbreak of the 2009 H1N1 pandemic influenza is shown in Box 1.
Box 1: An example of interacting intervention levels
A systematic review of interventions to increase vaccination amongst health care
workers (Lam, Chambers, MacDougall, & McCarthy, 2010) investigated inter-
ventions in 12 randomised controlled trials and controlled before-and-after
studies published from 1992 to 2009. The interventions included education orpromotion (efforts to raise awareness and increase knowledge about influenza andvaccination); improved access to vaccination (e.g. extended opening hours, mobilevaccination); legislation or regulation (e.g. mandatory vaccination); measurementand feedback where rates are tracked and then publicised; and role model workwhere senior staff encourage vaccination.
The study found that in hospital settings, education campaigns and interven-
tions to improve access resulted in only small increases in rates of uptake.
Campaigns involving more coercive components achieved higher rates of uptake.In non-hospital health care settings, they concluded that a combination ofeducational campaigns and improved access yielded greatest increases in uptake.This nicely illustrates the importance of context in intervention effectiveness.
Evidence of effectiveness and cost-effectiveness: importance to policy-makers
The House of Lords Inquiry asked for evidence of effective and ineffective behaviour
change interventions. It was evident from SM ’s experience of being called as a
witness to the Inquiry that the members were dissatisfied with the quantity and
quality of the evidence contained within the large number of submissions they
received. They wanted ‘hard evidence ’of effective interventions that could be
recommended to Government. We used the BCW to structure the identification andpresentation of examples, emphasising that they are a small selection derived from avery extensive evidence base. They address broad questions concerning the types ofintervention that can be effective; it must be stressed that the same type ofintervention can be delivered in many different ways and this would influence itseffectiveness. Implementation of evidence-based interventions across behaviour,
population and setting is not a mechanistic process and is underpinned by a recent
but rapidly developing science (see the journal Implementation Science ).
There is an extensive evidence base on specific BCTs to apply within each of the
intervention functions specified in the BCW , and we provide a selection by way ofillustration:
(1) Education: provision of educational materials can increase uptake of cervical
cancer screening (Forbes, Jepson, & Martin-Hirsch, 2002).
(2) Persuasion: hard-hitting mass media campaigns can increase smoking
cessation rates (Bala, Strzeszynski, & Cahill, 2008); brief GP advice increasessmoking cessation rates (Stead, Bergson, & Lancaster, 2008); mass mediacampaigns can have an immediate effect in increasing rate of HIV testing(Vidanapathirana, Abramson, Forbes, & Fairley, 2005).16 S. Michie and R. West
(3) Incentives: vouchers for pregnant smokers to stop can increase smoking
cessation rates for the duration of the pregnancy (Heil et al., 2008; Higginset al., 2010).
(4) Coercion: increasing the price of alcohol and tobacco reduces consumption
(Babor et al., 2003); speed cameras and speeding fines reduce speeding and
vehicle crash rates (Wilson, Willis, Hendrikz, Le Brocque, & Bellamy, 2010);random breath testing and driving bans reduce drink-driving and alcohol-related death rates (Babor et al., 2003).
(5) Training: social skills training can reduce antisocial behaviour (Losel &
Beelmann, 2010); parenting training can reduce unintentional injury rates inchildren (Kendrick, Barlow, Hampshire, Polnay, & Stewart-Brown, 2007).
(6) Restrictions: restricting availability, for example by reducing outlet density, has
been found to reduce excessive alcohol consumption and alcohol related harm
(Babor et al., 2003).
(7) Enablement: behavioural support and medications such as nicotine replace-
ment therapy, bupropion and varenicline are effective in helping smokers tostop (Cahill, Stead, & Lancaster, 2007; Hughes, Stead, & Lancaster, 2007;Lancaster & Stead, 2005; Stead, Perera, Bullen, Mant, & Lancaster, 2008);methadone maintenance treatment is effective in reducing criminal activity tofund heroin use (Drugs and Public Policy Group, 2010); gastric banding
surgery reduces calorie intake and therefore obesity (Colquitt, Picot, Love-
man, & Clegg, 2009).
(8) Modelling: hand-washing by senior role models can increase hand hygiene
behaviour of healthcare workers (Lankford et al., 2003).
(9) Environmental restructuring: prompts and reminders can improve health
professional management of diabetic patients (Renders et al., 2001).
The following examples of ineffective interventions are a small selection from a very
extensive evidence base. It must be remembered, however, that proving a negative isimpossible and when it comes to conclusions about intervention effectiveness withregard to behaviour change it is more common to encounter statements of the kind‘the evidence is too weak to support any firm conclusions ’. Where the negative
evidence is strong we simply state the finding but where it is weaker we use phrasessuch as ‘does not appear to ’.
(1) Education: drug and alcohol education in schools has been found to be
ineffective (Babor et al., 2003; Drugs and Public Policy Group, 2010).
(2) Persuasion: school-based programmes including attempts at persuasion have
not been effective in reducing overeating in children (Summerbell et al., 2005);public service announcements have proved ineffective in reducing excessivealcohol consumption (Babor et al., 2003).
(3) Incentives: financial incentives have not proved effective in promoting long-
term smoking cessation (Cahill & Perera, 2011); the current form of financial
incentives through Quality Outcome Framework payments to record smokingstatus and raise the topic of smoking with patients does not appear to haveincreased rates of prescribing stop-smoking medications as an objectivemarker of smoking-cessation activity (Coleman, 2010).Health Psychology Review 17
(4) Coercion: criminalisation and decriminalisation of use of psychoactive drugs
appear to have little or no effect on prevalence of drug use (Drugs and PublicPolicy Group, 2010).
(5) Training: advanced driver training does not appear to promote safer driving or
reduce traffic accident rates (Ker, Roberts, Collier, Renton, & Bunn, 2003).
(6) Restrictions: residency restrictions on sex-offenders do not appear to be
effective in reducing reoffending (Durling, 2006).
(7) Enablement: relatively brief physician counselling does not appear to be
effective in helping obese individuals reduce calorie intake (Tsai & Wadden,2009).
(8) Modelling: The widely adopted Drug Abuse Resistance Education project
which included use of role modelling was ineffective in preventing later illicit
drug use in adolescents (Vincus, Ringwalt, Harris, & Shamblen, 2010).
(9) Environmental restructuring: prompts and reminders have been found to be
ineffective in increasing the rate of physician prescribing of antihypertensivemedication (Heidenreich, 2003).
Recent developments in research on behaviour change have identified highly cost-
effective interventions tackling unhealthy diets, physical inactivity, obesity, smoking
and salt reduction (Asaria, Chisholm, Mathers, Ezzati, & Beaglehole, 2007; Cecchiniet al., 2010; WHO, 2003). In collaboration with WHO and other partners, The
Lancet convened some of the world ’s leading scientists working in chronic diseases
and commissioned a series of reviews to examine the evidence for behaviouralinterventions aimed at disease prevention. This is summarised below, with BCW
policies and intervention functions signalled in brackets.
A modelling analysis of behavioural interventions combining the health and
economic outcomes of interventions targeting unhealthy diets, physical inactivity andobesity showed the following to be cost-effective (Cecchini et al., 2010):
(1) Fiscal measures [policy] that increase the price of unhealthy food content
[coercion] or reduce the cost of healthy foods rich in fibre [incentivisation]were found to produce the largest health gains in the shortest timeframe, beingconsistently cost-saving and generating the largest health effects in both 20years and 50 years.
(2) Regulation [policy] of food advertising to children that improves nutritional
information [education] or restricts the marketing of unhealthy foods to
children [environmental restructuring] were found to have very favourable cost
effectiveness ratios, as do mass media [policy] and worksite health promotion[persuasion, education] campaigns.
(3) Service delivery [policy]: Physician counselling of individuals at risk in primary
care [enablement] is one of the most effective interventions, but its health effectis greatest and cost-effectiveness best in countries where a larger proportion ofthe population has regular access to primary-care physicians and facilities.
(4) Communication/marketing [policy]: School-based health promotion interven-
tions [persuasion, education] consistently have unfavourable cost-effectiveness
ratios up to 50 years from their initial implementation. However, the cost-effectiveness of interventions targeting young children tends to improve18 S. Michie and R. West
substantially in a longer timeframe (greater than 50 years), as these
interventions realise their full potential in improving health.
This review also found that, consistent with NICE ’s review of behaviour change
interventions, multiple-intervention strategies achieved substantially larger health
gains than individual interventions, and often more cost effectively.
A review of interventions to reduce tobacco and salt intake over 10 years
(2006 /C12015) found they could avert 13.8 million deaths at a cost of less than US$0.40
per person per year in low-income and lower middle-income countries, andUS$0.50 /C11.00 per person per year in upper middle-income countries (as of 2005)
(Asaria et al., 2007). The tobacco control interventions were:
(1) Fiscal measures [policy]: increased taxes on tobacco products [coercion] to
reduce smoking prevalence.
(2) Legislation [policy] to enforce smoke-free workplaces [environmental restruc-
turing].
(3) Legislation [policy] requirements for FCTC-compliant packaging and label-
ling of tobacco products [environmental restructuring] combined with publicawareness campaigns [policy] about the health risks of smoking [education/persuasion], and
(4) A comprehensive ban [policy] on tobacco advertising, promotion and
sponsorship [environmental restructuring].
Conclusions
Governments have a duty of care to protect citizens from external and internal
threats. They seek approval from electorates in part on the basis of promises to enactpolicies that will benefit health and wellbeing and that the public will accept. If theylimit the options they are willing to consider on the basis of doctrines such as ‘nudge ’
they will fail in that responsibility and will directly contribute to unnecessary deathand suffering. Part of the reason why this doctrine has gained currency is a lack of a
clear comprehensive framework for analysing behaviour and determining an
intervention strategy. Such frameworks as have been used, such as MINDSPACE,are partial and lack coherence. This article presents a system for analysing behaviourin context (the COM-B system), a theory of motivation that encompasses bothreflective and automatic processes and how they interact (PRIME), and a frameworkfor classifying interventions and policies (the BCW) which can be linked to theanalysis of behaviour. This systematic, comprehensive and theory-based approach tointervention development should help policy makers to select intervention strategies
that have a reasonable chance of being effective. Only within this context should the
issues of public acceptability and practicability be considered; they are key to thesuccess of interventions but should not be the starting point.
References
Abraham, C., Kelly, M.P ., West, R., & Michie, S. (2009). The UK National Institute for
Health and Clinical Excellence public health guidance on behaviour change: A brief
introduction. Psychology Health & Medicine ,14(1), 1 /C18.Health Psychology Review 19
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychology ,27(3), 379 /C1387.
Anderson, P . (2009). Is it time to ban alcohol advertising? Clinical Medicine ,9(2), 121 /C1124.
Asaria, P ., Chisholm, D., Mathers, C., Ezzati, M., & Beaglehole, R. (2007). Chronic disease
prevention: Health effects and ﬁnancial costs of strategies to reduce salt intake and control
tobacco use. Lancet ,370(9604), 2044 /C12053.
Babor, T.F., Caetano, R., Casswell, S., Edwards, G., Giesbrecht, N., Graham, K., & Rossow, I.
(2003). Alcohol: No ordinary commodity . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bala, M., Strzeszynski, L., & Cahill, K. (2008). Mass media interventions for smoking
cessation in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review ,23(1), D004704.
Bassi, F . (2010). Obesity and the economics of prevention: Fit not fat . Geneva: OECD.
Cahill, K., & Perera, R. (2011). Competitions and incentives for smoking cessation. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Review . doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD004307.pub4
Cahill, K., Stead, L.F., & Lancaster, T. (2007). Nicotine receptor partial agonists for smoking
cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review . doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006103.pub5
Cecchini, M., Sassi, F., Lauer, J.A., Lee, Y .Y ., Guajardo-Barron, V ., & Chisholm, D. (2010).
Tackling of unhealthy diets, physical inactivity, and obesity: Health effects and cost-effectiveness. Lancet ,376(9754), 1775 /C11784.
Coleman, T. (2010). Do ﬁnancial incentives for delivering health promotion counselling work?
Analysis of smoking cessation activities stimulated by the quality and outcomes framework.BMC Public Health ,10, 167.
Colquitt, J.L., Picot, J., Loveman, E., & Clegg, A.J. (2009). Surgery for obesity. Cochrane
Database of Systematic Review . doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003641.pub3
Craig, P ., Dieppe, P ., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew, M. (2008).
Developing and evaluating complex interventions: The new Medical Research Councilguidance. British Medical Journal ,337, a1655.
Drugs and Public Policy Group. (2010). Drug policy and the public good: A summary of the
book. Addiction ,105(7), 1137 /C11145.
Durling, C. (2006). Sex offenders, residency restrictions and reforming risk management law.
The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology ,97, 317 /C1363.
Fishbein, M., Triandis, H., Kanfer, F., Becker, M., Middlestadt, S., & Eichler, A. (2001).
Factors in ﬂuencing behaviour and behaviour change. In A. Baum, T. Revenson, & J. Singer
(Eds.), Handbook of health psychology (pp. 3 /C117). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates.
Forbes, C., Jepson, R., & Martin-Hirsch, P . (2002). Interventions targeted at women to
encourage the uptake of cervical screening. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review .
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD002834.pub2
Gardner, B., & West, R. (2011). Public support in England for raising the price of cigarettes to
fund tobacco control activities. Tobacco Control ,19(4), 331 /C1333.
Heidenreich, P .A. (2003). Understanding and modifying physician behavior for prevention
and management of cardiovascular disease. Journal of General Internal Medicine ,18(12),
1060 /C11061.
Heil, S.H., Higgins, S.T., Bernstein, I.M., Solomon, L.J., Rogers, R.E., Thomas, C.S., &
Lynch, M.E. (2008). Effects of voucher-based incentives on abstinence from cigarettesmoking and fetal growth among pregnant women. Addiction ,103(6), 1009 /C11018.
Higgins, S.T., Bernstein, I.M., Washio, Y ., Heil, S.H., Badger, G.J., Skelly, J.M., &
Solomon, L.J. (2010). Effects of smoking cessation with voucher-based contingencymanagement on birth outcomes. Addiction ,105(11), 2023 /C12030.
Hobbs, L.J., Campbell, R., Hildon, Z., & Michie, S. (2011). Behaviour change theories across
psychology, sociology, anthropology and economics: A systematic review. Psychology &
Health ,26(Suppl. 1), 31.
Hughes, J.R., Stead, L.F., & Lancaster, T. (2007). Antidepressants for smoking cessation.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Review . doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000031.pub3
Institute for Government. (2010). MINDSPACE; in ﬂuencing behaviour through public policy .
London: Institute for Government, The Cabinet Of ﬁce.
Kaskutas, L.A. (2009). Alcoholics anonymous effectiveness: Faith meets science. Journal of
Addictive Diseases ,28(2), 145 /C1157.20 S. Michie and R. West
Kendrick, D., Barlow, J., Hampshire, A., Polnay, L., & Stewart-Brown, S. (2007). Parenting
interventions for the prevention of unintentional injuries in childhood. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Review ,4, CD006020.
Ker, K., Roberts, I., Collier, T., Renton, F., & Bunn, F. (2003). Post-licence driver education
for the prevention of road traf ﬁc crashes. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review .
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD003734
Keren, G., & Schul, Y . (2009). Two is not always better than one: A critical evaluation of two-
system theories. Perspectives on Psychological Science ,4, 533.
Lam, P .P ., Chambers, L.W ., MacDougall, D.M., & McCarthy, A.E. (2010). Seasonal in ﬂuenza
vaccination campaigns for health care personnel: Systematic review. Canadian Medical
Association Journal ,182(12), E542 /C1E548.
Lancaster, T., & Stead, L.F. (2005). Individual behavioural counselling for smoking cessation.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Review . doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001292.pub2
Lankford, M.G., Zembower, T.R., Trick, W .E., Hacek, D.M., Noskin, G.A., & Peterson, L.R.
(2003). In ﬂuence of role models and hospital design on hand hygiene of healthcare workers.
Emerging Infectious Diseases ,9(2), 217 /C1223.
Losel, F., & Beelmann, A. (2010). Effects of child skills training in preventing antisocial
behavior: A systematic review of randomised evaluations. Annals of the American Academy
of Political and Social Science ,587,8 4/C1109.
Magriplis, E., Farajian, P ., Pounis, G.D., Risvas, G., Panagiotakos, D.B., & Zampelas, A.
(2011). High sodium intake of children through ‘hidden ’food sources and its association
with the Mediterranean diet: The GRECO study. Journal of Hypertension ,29(6), 1069 /C1
1076.
Marteau, T.M., Ogilvie, D., Roland, M., Suhrcke, M., & Kelly, M.P . (2011). Judging nudging:
Can nudging improve population health? British Medical Journal ,342, d228.
Maryon-Davis, A., & Jolley, R. (2010). Healthy nudges: When the public wants change and
politicians don ’t know it . London: Faculty of Public Health.
Means, motive, and opportunity. (2011). Retrieved December 23, 2011, from http://en.
wikipedia.org/wiki/Means,_motive,_and_opportunity
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Eccles, M.P ., Francis, J.J., Hardeman, W ., & Johnston, M. (2011).
Strengthening evaluation and implementation by specifying components of behaviourchange interventions: A study protocol. Implementation Science ,6(1), 10.
Michie, S., Ashford, S., Sniehotta, F .F., Dombrowski, S.U., Bishop, A., & French, D.P . (2011).
Ar e ﬁned taxonomy of behaviour change techniques to help people change their physical
activity and healthy eating behaviours: The CALO-RE taxonomy. Psychology & Health ,26,
1479 /C11498.
Michie, S., Churchill, S., & West, R. (2011). Identifying evidence-based competences required
to deliver behavioural support for smoking cessation. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,41(1),
59/C170.
Michie, S., Hyder, N., Walia, A., & West, R. (2011). Development of a taxonomy of behaviour
change techniques used in individual behavioural support for smoking cessation. Addictive
Behaviors ,36(4), 315 /C1319.
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Francis, J., Hardeman, W ., & Eccles, M. (2008). From theory to
intervention: Mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants to behaviour changetechniques. Applied Psychology: An International Review ,57, 660 /C1680.
Michie, S., van Stralen, M., & West, R. (2011). The behaviour change wheel: A new method
for characterising and designing behaviour change interventions. Implementation Science ,6,
doi: 10.1186/1748-5908-6-42.
Michie, S., & West, R. (2010). Behaviour change interventions: Evidence and applications.
Submission to the House of Lords Science and Technology Select Committee Call forEvidence: Behaviour Change.
Michie, S., Whittington, C., Hamoudi, Z., Zarnani, F., Tober, G., & West, R. (in press).
Behaviour change techniques to reduce excessive alcohol use and their associations withoutcom. Addiction .
Mook, D. (1995). Motivation: The organization of action . New Y ork: London W .W . Norton &
Company.Health Psychology Review 21
National Institute of Health and Clinical Excellence. (2007). (NICE, 2007) Behaviour change
at population, community and individual levels (public health guidance 6) . London: NICE.
Nufﬁeld Council on Bioethics. (2007). Public health: Ethical issues . London: Nuf ﬁeld Council
on Bioethics.
Pisinger, C., Vestbo, J., Borch-Johnsen, K., & Jorgensen, T. (2005). It is possible to help
smokers in early motivational stages to quit. The Inter99 study. Preventive Medicine ,40(3),
278/C1284.
Rabinoff, M., Caskey, N., Rissling, A., & Park, C. (2007). Pharmacological and chemical
effects of cigarette additives. American Journal of Public Health ,97(11), 1981 /C11991.
Renders, C.M., Valk, G.D., Grif ﬁn, S., Wagner, E.H., Eijk, J.T., & Assendelft, W .J. (2001).
Interventions to improve the management of diabetes mellitus in primary care, outpatientand community settings. Cochrane Database of Systematic Revew . doi: 10.1002/14651858.
CD001481
Shahab, L., & West, R. (2011). Public support in England for a total ban on the sale of
tobacco products. Tobacco Control ,19(2), 143 /C1147.
Skinner, B.F . (1953). Science and human behavior . New Y ork: Free Press.
Stead, L.F ., Bergson, G., & Lancaster, T. (2008). Physician advice for smoking cessation.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Review . doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000165.pub3
Stead, L.F., Perera, R., Bullen, C., Mant, D., & Lancaster, T. (2008). Nicotine replacement
therapy for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review . doi: 10.1002/
14651858.CD000146.pub3
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. (2004). Re ﬂective and impulsive determinants of social behavior.
Personality of Social Psychological Review ,8(3), 220 /C1247.
Summerbell, C.D., Waters, E., Edmunds, L.D., Kelly, S., Brown, T., & Campbell, K.J. (2005).
Interventions for preventing obesity in children. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review .
doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD001871.pub3
Thaler, R., & Sunstein, C. (2008). Nudge: Improving decisions about health, wealth and
happiness . Boston: Yale University Press.
Tsai, A.G., & Wadden, T.A. (2009). Treatment of obesity in primary care practice in the
United States: A systematic review. Journal of General Internal Medicine ,24(9), 1073 /C11079.
Vidanapathirana, J., Abramson, M.J., Forbes, A., & Fairley, C. (2005). Mass media
interventions for promoting HIV testing. Cochrane Database of Systematic Review . doi:
10.1002/14651858.CD004775.pub2
Vincus, A.A., Ringwalt, C., Harris, M.S., & Shamblen, S.R. (2010). A short-term, quasi-
experimental evaluation of D.A.R.E. ‘s revised elementary school curriculum. Journal of
Drug Education ,40(1), 37 /C149.
West, R. (2005). Time for a change: Putting the transtheoretical (stages of change) model to
rest. Addiction ,100(8), 1036 /C11039.
West, R. (2006). Theory of addiction . Oxford: Blackwell.
West, R., & Michie, S. (2010). Behaviour change: The importance of seeing the whole picture and
a critique of ‘Nudge ’.Submission to the House of Lords Science and Technology Select
Committee Call for Evidence: Behaviour Change.
West, R., Walia, A., Hyder, N., Shahab, L., & Michie, S. (2010). Behavior change techniques
used by the English Stop Smoking Services and their associations with short-term quitoutcomes. Nicotine & Tobacco Research ,12(7), 742 /C1747.
White, W .L. (2004). Transformational change: A historical review. Journal of Clinical
Psychology ,60(5), 461 /C1470.
WHO, (2003). Framework convention on tobacco control . Geneva: Author.
Wilson, C., Willis, C., Hendrikz, J.K., Le Brocque, R., & Bellamy, N. (2010). Speed cameras
for the prevention of road traf ﬁc injuries and deaths. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Review , (11), CD004607.
Y ouGov. (2010). Survey commissioned by cancer research UK between 22nd and 23rd July
2010. Retrieved from http://info.cancerresearchuk.org/news/index.htm22 S. Michie and R. West
