Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology and Health
ISSN: 0887-0446 (Print) 1476-8321 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Investigating theoretical explanations for
behaviour change: The case study of   ProActive
Susan Michie, Wendy Hardeman, Tom Fanshawe, A. Toby Prevost, Lyndsay
Taylor & Ann Louise Kinmonth
To cite this article:  Susan Michie, Wendy Hardeman, Tom Fanshawe, A. Toby Prevost,
Lyndsay Taylor & Ann Louise Kinmonth (2008) Investigating theoretical explanations for
behaviour change: The case study of   ProActive   , Psychology and Health, 23:1, 25-39, DOI:
10.1080/08870440701670588
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870440701670588
Published online: 14 Dec 2007.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1343
View related articles 

Psychology and Health
January 2008; 23(1): 25–39
Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour
change: The case study of ProActive
SUSAN MICHIE1, WENDY HARDEMAN2, TOM FANSHAWE3,
A. TOBY PREVOST2, LYNDSAY TAYLOR1,&
ANN LOUISE KINMONTH2
1Department of Psychology, University College London, 1-19 T orrington Place, London
WC1E 7HB, UK,2University of Cambridge, Public Health and Primary Care, Institute
of Public Health, Robinson W ay, Cambridge CB2 0SR, UK, and3Department of
Mathematics and Statistics, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YF , UK
(Received 26 June 2007; in final form 7 September 2007)
Abstract
Developing more effective behavioural interventions requires an understanding of the
mechanisms of behaviour change, and methods to rigorously test their theoretical basis.
The delivery and theoretical basis of an intervention protocol were assessed in ProActive ,
a UK trial of an intervention to increase the physical activity of those at risk of Type 2diabetes ( N¼365). In 108 intervention sessions, behaviours of facilitators were
mapped to four theories that informed intervention development and behaviours
of participants were mapped to 17 theoretical components of these four theories. The
theory base of the intervention specified by the protocol was different than thatdelivered by facilitators, and that received by participants. Of the intervention techniques
delivered, 25% were associated with theory of planned behaviour (TPB), 42% with
self-regulation theory (SRT), 24% with operant learning theory (OLT) and 9% withrelapse prevention theory (RPT). The theoretical classification of participant talk
showed a different pattern, with twice the proportion associated with OLT (48%), 21%
associated with TPB, 31% with SRT and no talk associated with RPT. This studydemonstrates one approach to assessing the extent to which the theories used to guideintervention development account for any changes observed.
Keywords: Theory, behaviour change, process evaluation, behavioural interventions,
physical activity
Correspondence: Susan Michie, Department of Psychology, University College London, 1-19
Torrington Place, London, WCIE 7HB, UK. Tel: þ44(0)20 7679 5930. E-mail: s.michie@
ucl.ac.uk
ISSN 0887-0446 print/ISSN 1476-8321 online /C2232008 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/08870440701670588
There is widespread recognition that behaviour change is key to improving health
(UK Department of Health, 2004; US Department of Health and Human
Services, 2000; WHO, 2002). In the United States, half of all deaths areestimated to be due to modifiable behaviours including smoking, physical
inactivity, unhealthy eating and excessive alcohol use (Mokdad, Markes, Stroup,
& Gerberding, 2004). There is good evidence that behavioural interventions canreduce or delay the incidence of disease (Gillies et al., 2007).
Until recently, few health behaviour change interventions were developed on
the basis of theory, limiting the evaluation of mechanisms of change and theirusefulness in developing more effective interventions (Kok, Schaalma, Ruiter,
Van Empelen, & Brug, 2004; Noar & Zimmerman, 2005; Ory, Jordan,
& Bazzarre, 2002). Evaluation of theory-based interventions offers the potentialfor generalising effective, and avoiding ineffective, interventions (Albaraccin
et al., 2005; Trifiletti, Gielen, Sleet, & Hopkins, 2005). However, demonstrating
the effectiveness of a theory-based intervention does not provide evidence for theexplanatory value of the theory; change may occur due to factors other than those
specified by the theory. Theory is rarely applied or tested with sufficient precision
to allow theoretical conclusions to be drawn to inform future interventiondevelopment, even in well-designed interventions. There is a need for more
rigorous work to define, operationalise and test the ‘‘theory-base’’ of interventions
(Michie & Abraham, 2004; Noar & Zimmerman, 2005; Rothman, 2004).
To evaluate the extent to which theories used to guide intervention
development explain observed changes in behavioural outcomes, the relationship
between intervention techniques and theories of behaviour change should beelucidated. Further, intervention delivery should be protocol-based and protocol
adherence should be assessed (Bellg et al., 2004; Borrelli et al., 2005) so that the
extent to which interventions are delivered and received as planned is known.This requires detailed and precise descriptions of intervention techniques;
regrettably, this is rare (Hardeman, Griffin, Johnston, Kinmonth, & Wareham,
2000; Michie & Abraham, 2004). A review of 287 evaluations of behaviourchange interventions found that only 30% incorporated a mechanism to assess
protocol adherence (Borrelli et al., 2005). Finally, evaluations should measure
change along the hypothesised causal pathway from theoretical determinantsof behaviour change to behaviour, allowing mediation analysis. This pathway
comprises five steps (Figure 1).
First, theories of behaviour provide the determinants that are targeted by the
behaviour-change techniques specified in the second step, the intervention
protocol. Third is the delivery of the techniques as planned (protocol
implementation). Fourth is the response of participants which gives an indicationof the extent to which the intervention has been understood, processed and acted
on by participants. The final step is the behavioural outcome of the intervention
(or ‘‘enactment of treatment skills’’, Bellg et al., 2004).
We use this framework to develop a method to assess theoretically the
implementation and receipt of a theory- and evidence-based intervention(ProActive ) to increase physical activity in adults at risk of Type 2 diabetes26 S. Michie et al.
(Hardeman et al., 2005; Kinmonth et al., 2006; Williams et al., 2004). The
work complements a study investigating the fidelity of intervention delivery
(Hardeman et al., in this issue).
The theoretical model of behavioural determinants was the theory of planned
behaviour (TPB; Ajzen, 1991). The behaviour change techniques were selectedon the basis of published evidence of effectiveness (Hardeman et al., 2005). Many
of these techniques can be considered within the frameworks of self-regulation
theory (SRT; Bandura, 2000; Carver & Scheier, 1981, 1999), operant learningtheory (OLT; Skinner, 1953) and relapse prevention theory (RPT; Marlatt& George, 1998) (Michie, Hardeman, & Abraham, 2005).
The TPB states that the main predictor of behaviour is intention to act, which,
in turn, is predicted by the attitude towards the behaviour, subjective normin relation to the behaviour and perceived behavioural control. Behaviourchanges in response to persuasion and information aimed at changing thesecognitive determinants. SRT postulates that behaviour is goal directed andTargeted
behavioural
outcomesParticipant
response
(receipt)Intervention
protocol
(protocol
based
behaviours)Theories of
behaviour
Theory of
Planned
Behaviour
Self-
Regulation
Theory
Operant
Learning
Theory
Relapse
Prevention
TheoryBuild motivationGive information
Set goalsDevelop action plansSelf-monitoringReview goals
Use promptsUse rewardsBuild supportGeneralise skillsBuild habits
Prepare for setbacksFacilitator
communication
(protocol
delivery) 
AttitudeSubjective normPerceived behavioural control
GoalsAction plansSelf-monitoring/feedbackGraded tasksSelf-talkTHEORY-ASSOCIATEDTECHNIQUES THEORETICALCOMPONENTS
Increased
physical
activity 
Cues/triggers/promptsRewards/avoidance ofnegative consequencesSelf-reinforcementPunishments
Anticipation of high-risk situationsAvoidance of high-risk situationsStrengthening coping responses tohigh-risk situationsAttributions of cause of setbackReframing of reactions to setback  
Figure 1. Mediating links between theories of behaviour and behavioural outcomes.Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 27
controlled by feedback loops resulting from systematic processes of monitoring
behaviour, evaluating discrepancies between performance and desired goal
and implementing strategies to reduce this discrepancy within a changing
environment. Behaviour is changed by appropriate goal-setting, self-monitoringand action plans. According to OLT, behaviour is learnt as a result of
contingencies between behaviour and consequent events (external or internal),
with these contingencies signalled by antecedent events or situations (externalor internal). The frequency of behaviour is changed by changing antecedents
(e.g. cues, reminders) and consequences (e.g. rewards, punishments). RPT posits
that behavioural change is maintained by identifying situations in which relapse islikely and taking steps to prevent or minimise relapse (e.g. avoiding the situation,
or using appropriate coping skills within it), and by rehearsing and generalising
behaviours. Behavioural maintenance is therefore facilitated by correctidentification of ‘‘risky’’ situations and development of effective strategies to
avoid or manage them.
The mediating links between these behaviour change theories and behavioural
outcomes are shown in Figure 1. The intervention techniques and theoretical
constructs associated with them are also shown. The aims of the current studywere to develop methods to evaluate:
1. The theoretical basis of the delivered intervention.
2. Theoretical explanations of behaviour change.
Methods
Sample
A sub-sample of 27 participants of the ProActive trial provided audiotapes of
four key intervention sessions (see Hardeman et al. in this issue for details).
Procedure
Ethical approval was granted [1]. Participants gave consent for the audiotape
recording of their sessions.
Development of reliable coding frames to assess theoretical basis of protocols, delivery
and receipt
Facilitator communication. Four raters (the first two authors, a health
psychologist and a clinical psychologist) independently categorised 14 techniquesinto one or more of the four behavioural theories (Figure 1). For example, thefacilitator behaviour ‘‘ask where and when the participant will do their activity’’
was classified under the technique ‘‘action planning’’, and this technique was
classified under SRT. Five techniques were categorised under more than onetheory. To simplify the analysis, the theory mentioned by the highest number
of raters was chosen. There was complete consensus for categorisation according
to theory for eight techniques (57%) [2].28 S. Michie et al.
Participant response. All instances of participants talking about change or
maintenance of physical activity were independently categorised into one or
more of the four theories and 17 component constructs by the first and fifthauthors. The constructs, identified from relevant literature were: attitude towardsthe target behaviour, perceived control over the behaviour, subjective norm
(TPB); goals, action plans, self-monitoring/feedback, graded tasks and self-talk
(SRT); cues/triggers/prompts, external rewards/avoidance of negativeconsequences, self-reinforcement, punishments (OLT); anticipation of high-risksituations, avoidance of high-risk situations, strengthening coping responses tohigh-risk situations, attributions of cause of setback, reframing of reactions to
setback (RPT). Examples of categorised behaviours are ‘‘thinking about benefits
of activity e.g. losing weight’’ (attitudes); ‘‘wife will be proud’’ (subjective norm);‘‘parking car further away so has to walk further (action plans); ‘‘You can do this.... It’s only half an hour ...’’ (self-talk); ‘‘asking partner to remind him’’ (cues to
action) and ‘‘buying new clothes after’’ (reward). Discrepancies were discussed
and coding guidelines refined accordingly, until more than 70% agreement was
achieved [3]. Inter-rater agreement for coding participant responses intotheoretical constructs increased from 24 to 54 to 94% over three rounds(one transcript per round), giving a mean of 60% (116 agreements/194observations). Agreement on coding of participant responses into theories was
90% (62 agreements/69 observations) on the first round.
Outcome measures
Physical activity was measured objectively (dayPAR) and by questionnaire
(see Hardeman et al in this issue for details). Although the study was not poweredfor a definitive analysis, we report an exploratory analysis of the associationsbetween behaviours categorised according to theory and outcomes to illustratethe approach (Table IV).
Analysis of theoretical basis of the intervention and explanations for behaviour
change. The intervention was analysed theoretically, using different
denominators, to address the research questions:
1. What is the theoretical basis of delivery? This was determined by calculating
(a) the number of protocol specified behaviours that were associated with eachtheory, and (b) the proportion of these behaviours that were delivered by
facilitators.
2. To what extent do the theories explain behaviour change? This was
determined by calculating (a) the proportions of facilitator behaviours
assigned to each theory (the denominator being the total number of delivered
facilitator behaviours) and the proportions of participants’ responses assignedto each theory, and (b) the association between theoretical category ofparticipant response and physical activity outcome.
Frequencies and proportions of facilitator behaviours and participant responses
were calculated for each participant separately, and mean frequencies/proportionsInvestigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 29
and 95% confidence intervals calculated by averaging over the 27 participants.
Analysis was carried out using SPSS v12.0.
Results
Aim 1: Theoretical basis of intervention protocol and delivery
Theoretical basis of protocol. Protocol-specified facilitator behaviours were
categorised according to technique and theory. The percentages of
protocol-specified behaviours according to theory were TPB 19%, SRT 32%,OLT 24%, RPT 15% and ‘‘other’’ 10% [‘‘other’’ refers to behaviours intwo techniques (summarising messages and eliciting questions) not categorisedinto any theory].
Theoretical basis of intervention delivery. The facilitators delivered an average of
45% of protocol-specified behaviours. This varied across theory (Table I), with
51% of behaviours associated with TPB delivered on average, 50% for SRT, 41%for OLT, 26% for RPT and 61% for ‘‘other’’. The percentages and confidenceintervals in Table I suggest that the proportion of RPT-associated behavioursdelivered was lower than for the other theories.
Table I. Theoretical basis of protocol delivery by facilitators.
TechniquePercentage of protocol-specified
behaviours delivered
(averaged across participants)Total percentage
for theory (95% CI)
Build motivation 51aTPB:
Give information 50 51 (43–58)
Set goals 62 SRT:
Develop action plans 50 50 (44–55)
Self-monitoring 50Review goals 43Use prompts 34 OLT:
Use rewards 54 41% (35–47)
Build support 43Generalise skills 25Build habits 36
Prepare for setbacks 26 RPT:
26 (19–33)
Summarise message 66 ‘‘Other’’
b:
Elicit questions 51 61 (51–70)All Theories 45
Notes:aThis does not always equal the ratio of the mean delivered to the number specified by the
protocol as for some participants the number specified was reduced by a small number because of
missing data due to coding errors.
bThese are categorised as ‘‘other’’ for the current analysis; however, these techniques could be
considered in relation to communication theory in another context.30 S. Michie et al.
Aim 2: Theoretical explanation of behaviour change
Theoretical basis of facilitator behaviours. Intervention delivery was assessed using
as the denominator the total number of facilitator behaviours delivered to eachparticipant across the four sessions (not the number of behaviours specified in theprotocol). Of the facilitator behaviours delivered, on average 25% were associated
with TPB, 42% with SRT, 24% with OLT and 9% with RPT (Table II).
Theoretical basis of participant response. The frequencies of participant responses
(their relevant talk during sessions) according to the 12 theoretical constructscoded are shown in Table II (there were no responses relevant to the fivecomponents of RPT). Over a third of participants’ responses were coded as
‘‘rewards’’ (an average of eight responses per participant per session), with the
next most frequent category being ‘‘attitude’’ – mainly perceived benefits of
physical activity (an average of four responses per participant per session). Cues
and self-monitoring each had an average of two responses per participant persession, with less than this for all other component-coded responses. Averaged
across the 27 participants, participants’ talk about behaviour change was
consistent with TPB on 21% of occasions, SRT on 31% of occasions and OLT
on 48% of occasions, with no talk relevant to RPT.
Comparison of facilitator behaviours and participant response. The percentages and
frequencies of facilitator behaviours and participant responses according to theory
are shown in Table II. The proportions of participants’ responses assigned to
TPB, SRT and RPT were less than the proportions of facilitator behaviours, but
the proportion of participants’ responses assigned to OLT was twice as great as
the proportion of facilitator behaviours. For 6 of the 14 techniques (Figure 1),it was possible to indirectly compare facilitators’ delivery with participants’
responses; the matching theoretical constructs are shown in Table III. These data
show that participants talk more about rewards relative to facilitators, and less
about all other intervention components.
Associations between theoretical basis and physical outcomes. In the 25/27
participants who had complete dayPAR follow-up, the average change over 12
months was þ0.08 (SD ¼0.49, range ¼/C01.07–1.04), similar to the change in the
intervention arms of the trial. There were no significant associations between
theoretical categorisations of facilitator/participants behaviours and change in
physical activity over the year of the study in this small sample (Table IV).
Discussion
This study reports an innovative approach to developing theoretical explanations
for behaviour change following interventions. It examines the delivery of an
intervention, as well as its receipt, by reliably categorising talk between facilitators
and participants within sessions into theoretical categories. It compares theInvestigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 31
Table II. Percentage and frequency of facilitator behaviours and participant responses according to theory and theoretical component.
Facilitator behaviours Participant responses
TheoryPercentage total
mean (SD)aTotal
frequencybPercentage total
mean (SD)aTotal
frequencybFrequency of theoretical
component among participants
TPB 25.27 522 21.31 125 Attitude 110 Perceived behavioural control 12
(3.38) (11.11) Subjective norm 3
SRT 41.61 846 30.65 184 Goals 10 Graded tasks 13
(6.43) (14.76) Action Plans 52 Self-talk 53
Self-monitoring/feedback 56
OLT 24.22 507 48.04 293 Cues/triggers/prompts 55 Self-reinforcement 18
(3.85) (16.15) Rewards/avoidance
of negative consequences219 Punishments 1
RPT 8.89 208 0 0
(4.18)
Total 100 2083 100 602
Notes:a‘‘% Total’’ column was derived by calculating % for each of the 27 participants, then averaging across participants.bAggregated over
participants.32 S. Michie et al.
Table III. Comparison between frequency of participant responses according to theoretical component, and the associated facilitator behaviour s.
Theoretical component
in participant talkTechnique used
by facilitatorFrequency of
participant
responsesaFrequency of facilitator
behavioursaRatio of participant
responses to
facilitator behaviours
Attitude (inc. outcome expectancy),
subjective norm, perceivedbehavioural control, graded tasksBuild motivation 138 495 0.28
Action plans Develop action plans 52 188 0.28
Goals Set goals and review goals 10 502 0.02
Cues/triggers/prompts Use prompts 55 86 0.64
Self-monitoring/feedback Self-monitoring 56 156 0.36Rewards/avoidance of negative
consequences, actively organised rewardUse rewards 237 194 1.22
Note:
aAcross all 27 participants.Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 33
Table IV. Association between proportions of facilitator delivery and participant response assigned to theories and change in physical activity be tween
baseline and 12 months (Spearman’s correlations with 95% confidence interval).
Facilitator delivery Participant response
TheoryChange in
dayPARChange in self-reported
physical activityChange in
dayPARaChange in self-reported
physical activity
TPB 0.02 0.26 0.24 /C00.16
(/C00.38 to 0.41) ( /C00.14 to 0.60) ( /C00.17 to 0.58) ( /C00.52 to 0.25)
SRT 0.002 0.37 0.003 0.34
(/C00.39 to 0.40) ( /C00.03 to 0.67) ( /C00.39 to 0.40) ( /C00.06 to 0.65)
OLT /C00.12 0.31 /C00.20 /C00.11
(/C00.49 to 0.29) ( /C00.09 to 0.63) ( /C00.55 to 0.21) ( /C00.48 to 0.29)
RPT /C00.02 0.12 – –
(/C00.41 to 0.38) ( /C00.29 to 0.49)
Note:an¼25; two participants had missing 12-month day PAR data.34 S. Michie et al.
theoretical underpinning of the intervention protocol, delivery in practice and
intervention receipt. Detailed analyses of the component techniques delivered in
the intervention showed that fidelity to protocol varied by technique and
theoretical category of technique. About half of the protocol components weredelivered, but the theoretical basis of the delivered intervention largely reflectedthat of the protocol.
Comparison of facilitator communication and participant response showed
a clear theoretical difference between intervention delivery and receipt. Receiptwas lower than delivery, as assessed by frequency of relevant utterances, for all
theoretical categories apart from operant theory. The proportion of participants’
responses assigned to operant theory was twice as great for participants as forfacilitators; this difference reflects participants’ tendency to talk more aboutrewards, rather than to talk more about cues.
The significance of this study lies in conceptualising, and attempting to assess,
behaviour change interventions as a causal sequence rather than an input–outputassociation. This is especially important if conclusions are to be drawn about
theoretical mechanism of change, as well as efficacy. Conclusions about the
explanatory power of theory cannot be drawn from efficacy results of theoreticallybased interventions unless detailed assessment of protocol content and deliveryand participant response is conducted, and unless the links between theory andintervention techniques are established. In our study, these links, illustrated
in Figure 1, were established by consensus methods. This study produced
a substantive finding worthy of further research: that participants talk aboutbehaviour change in ways consistent with OLT more frequently than dofacilitators. This finding points to increasing the role of operant techniques in
interventions to change physical activity.
However, the main significance of this study is conceptual, rather than
substantive, due to limitations in inference and power. Interpretation of delivery
is limited by the assumption that the more frequently a technique is delivered, the
greater impact on behaviour change it will have. It may be that one techniquewithin a theoretical cluster is particularly powerful or well delivered, therebyaccounting for more change than another technique that is delivered more
frequently. Interpretation of receipt is limited by the assumption that the extent to
which people talk about the targeted behaviour (in this case, physical activity)in terms of a particular theoretical construct reflects the extent to which thisconstruct explains behaviour change in their everyday life. These assumptions
need to be tested empirically. We know that people are not always accurate in
their direct reporting of their cognitive processes (Nisbett & Wilson, 1977),and that behaviour may be determined by automatic, non-conscious processes(Bargh & Ferguson, 2000). However, in our study, people were not asked about
influences on their behaviour or to report on their cognitive processes. Instead,
their general discourse about the targeted behaviour was analysed accordingto theoretical determinant.
A key question is ‘‘Is the theoretical basis of the intervention associated with
outcome?’’ Because of the intensive nature of coding facilitator and participantInvestigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 35
behaviours, such coding was conducted for only 27 of the total 224 participants.
Thus, the study is not sufficiently powered to investigate the association between
the theoretical basis of techniques used and behavioural outcomes.
In conclusion, this study highlights key issues. The first is that one cannot
assume that the theoretical basis of an intervention as planned is reflected in
delivery or receipt in practice. Inferences about the mechanisms by which an
intervention has affected outcome should be informed by knowledge of itsdelivery and receipt by participants. In this study, assessment of delivery wasmore straightforward than assessment of receipt. We took participants’ verbal
behaviour as an indication of constructs that influence behaviour change:
Research to assess the reliability of this method and to develop more sophisticatedmethods is required.
Increasing attention is being paid to the fidelity of intervention delivery
(Bellg et al., 2004; Borrelli et al., 2005; Hardeman et al., in this issue), and thisstudy adds two dimensions. It links intervention delivery with theoreticalexplanation, and it documents participant responses as a further contribution
to understanding mechanisms of change. There are three areas of research
indicated by this study. The first is to investigate these associations to elucidatemechanisms of behaviour change in sufficiently well-resourced trials powered todetect differences in outcome measures. Such a trial could also investigatewhether the degree of concordance between the theoretical basis of techniques
used by intervention providers and theoretical basis of participants’ responses is
associated with outcome (over and above facilitator delivery and participantresponse on their own).
A second research area is a detailed assessment of protocol delivery and receipt
for the control group. This would reveal what the intervention group added overand above the control group, and whether the experience of being in the controlgroup may have itself facilitated behaviour change. Such an analysis of control,
as well as intervention, participants would inform the conclusions drawn from
trials of behavioural interventions.
Third, the development of a reliable taxonomy of behaviour change techniques
for describing the intervention protocol and delivery would facilitate the scientific
investigation of behavioural interventions. This would allow replication, both forintervention evaluations and for the application of effective interventions.A further refinement would be to develop a method for linking techniques to
particular theories of behaviour change. For theory to effectively inform
intervention development, and for intervention evaluation to effectively informtheory development, links between intervention techniques and theoreticalcomponents and theories need to be clear. The links between techniques and
theories/theoretical components for this study were made by four clinical and
health psychologists. A firmer basis for technique–theory links is required.Research is currently being conducted to develop a reliable taxonomy oftechniques and reliable links between techniques and theories, using a range
of consensus methods and a group of theoreticians and practitioners (Abraham
& Michie, in press; Francis, Michie, Johnston, Hardeman, & Eccles, 2005).36 S. Michie et al.
This study explores a method for identifying theoretical mechanisms in
interventions to change behaviour related to health. In doing so, it points toinnovations as well as limitations of the approach. These limitations point to
a research agenda for developing the science of behaviour change, especially the
need for a reliable taxonomy of behaviour change techniques and a method forlinking these to theory on one hand, and to behavioural outcomes on the other.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Diabetes UK (RG35259) who funded the ProActive fidelity
study; and to the UK Medical Research Council, National Health Service R&Dand Royal College of General Practitioners Scientific Foundation who funded thedevelopment and execution of the ProActive Trial (isrctn 61323766). We thank
study participants, facilitators and the practice teams for their collaboration andwork in helping with recruitment. We greatly acknowledge the contribution of the
ProActive research team: Kate Williams and Julie Grant (study coordinator and
recruitment leads); Ulf Ekelund and Emanuella De Lucia-Rolfe (measurementleads); and Toby Prevost and Tom Fanshawe (statisticians). Principal investi-gators are Ann Louise Kinmonth, Nick Wareham, Stephen Sutton, WendyHardeman, David Spiegelhalter and Simon Griffin. We are grateful to TheresaMarteau, Paschal Sheeran, Stephen Sutton and Falko Sniehotta for comments on
earlier drafts, and to two anonymous, very helpful reviewers.
Notes
[1] Ethical approval for the ProActive trial was granted by the UK Eastern MREC (02/5/53)
and the Cambridge (00/446), West Suffolk (00/046), Huntingdon (H01/734) and West
Essex (1442-0302) Local Research Ethics Committees. Approval was sought from therelevant Primary Care Trusts.
[2] Details available from first author.[3] Coding guidelines available from second author.
References
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (in press). Specifying behavior change techniques used in interventions:
A preliminary taxonomy. Health Psychology .
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Decision Making
Processes ,50, 179–211.
Albarracin, D., Gillette, J.C., Earl, A.N., Glasman, L.R., Durantini, M.R., & Ho, M.-H. (2005).
Test of major assumptions about behavior change: A comprehensive look at the effects ofpassive and active HIV-prevention interventions since the beginning of the epidemic.
Psychological Bulletin ,131, 856–897.
Bandura, A. (2000). Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive theory. In
P. Norman, C. Abraham & M. Conner (Eds), Understanding and changing health behavior .
The Netherlands: Harwood Academic Publishers.
Bargh, J.A., & Ferguson, M.J. (2000). Beyond behaviorism: On the automaticity of higher mental
processes. Psychological Bulletin ,126, 925–945.Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 37
Bellg, A., Borrelli, B., Resnick, B., Hecht, J., Minicucci, D.S., Ory, M., et al. (2004). Enhancing
treatment fidelity in health behavior change studies: Best practice and recommendations fromthe NIH behavior change consortium. Health Psychology ,23(Suppl 1), 443–451.
Borrelli, B., Sepinwall, D., Ernst, D., Bellg, A.J., Czajkowski, S., Breger, R., et al. (2005).
Assessment of treatment fidelity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology ,73, 852–860.
Carver, C.S., & Scheier, M.F. (1981). Attention and self-regulation: A control-theory approach to
human behavior . New York: Springer-Verlag.
Carver, C.S., & Scheier, M.F. (1999). Themes and issues in the self-regulation of behavior. In
R.S. Wyer Jr (Ed.), Perspectives on behavioral self-regulation. Advances in Social Cognition .
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Francis, J., Michie, S., Johnston, M., Hardeman, W., & Eccles, M. (2005). How do behavior
change techniques map on to psychological constructs? Results of a consensus process.Conference proceedings .Psychology and Health ,20, 83–84.
Gillies, C.L., Abrams, K.R., Lambert, P.C., Cooper, N.J., Sutton, A.J., Hsu, R.T., et al. (2007).
Pharmacological and lifestyle interventions to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes in people withimpaired glucose tolerance: Systematic review and meta-analysis. British Medical Journal ,334,
299–308.
Hardeman, W., Griffin, S., Johnston, M., Kinmonth, A.L., & Wareham, N.J. (2000). Interventions
to prevent weight gain: A systematic review of psychological models and behavior changemethods. International Journal of Obesity and Related Metabolic Disorders ,24, 131–143.
Hardeman, W., Michie, S., Prevost, A.T., Fanshawe, T., McLoughlin, K., & Kinmonth, A.L.
(2008). Fidelity of delivery of a physical activity intervention: Predictors and consequences.Psychology and Health ,23, 11–24.
Hardeman, W., Sutton, S., Griffin, S., Johnston, M., White, A., Wareham, N., et al. (2005).
A causal modelling approach to the development of theory-based behavior change programmes
for trial evaluation. Health Education Research ,20, 676–687.
Kinmonth, A.L., Hardeman, W., Sutton, S., Prevost, T., Fanshawe, T., Williams, K., et al. (2006).
The ProActive Trial: Impact of a theory-based behavioral intervention on physical activity,social function and psychological predictors. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,31, S018.
Kok, G., Schaalma, H., Ruiter, R.A.C., Van Empelen, P., & Brug, J. (2004). Intervention mapping:
A protocol for applying health psychology theory to prevention programmes. Journal of Health
Psychology ,9, 85–98.
Marlatt, G.A., & George, W.H. (1998). Relapse prevention and the maintenance of optimal health.
In S.A. Shumaker & E.B. Schron (Eds), The handbook of health behavior change (pp. 35–58).
New York, USA: Springer Publishing Co Inc.
Michie, S., & Abraham, C. (2004). Identifying techniques that promote health behavior change:
Evidence based or evidence inspired? Psychology and Health ,19, 29–49.
Michie, S., Hardeman, W., & Abraham, C. (2005). Identifying effective techniques: The example
of physical activity. Psychology and Health ,20(Suppl 1), 173.
Mokdad, A.H, Markes, J.S, Stroup, D.F, & Gerberding, J.L (2004). Actual causes of death in the
United States. Journal of the American Medical Association ,291, 1238–1245.
Nisbett, R.E., & Wilson, T.D. (1977). Telling more than we can know: Verbal reports on mental
processes. Psychological Review ,84, 231–259.
Noar, S.M., & Zimmerman, R.S. (2005). Health behavior theory and cumulative knowledge
regarding health behaviors: Are we moving in the right direction? Health Education Research ,20,
275–290.
Ory, M.G., Jordan, P.J., & Bazarre, T. (2002). The behavior change consortium: Setting the stage
for a new century of health behavior-change research. Health Education Research ,17, 500–511.
Rothman, A.J. (2004). Is there nothing more practical than a good theory? Why, innovations and
advances in health behavior change will arise if interventions are used to test and refine theory.International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,1. Retrieved October 2007.
Available at: http://www.ijbnpa.org/content/1/1/11.
Skinner, B.F. (1953). Science and human behavior . New York: Free Press.38 S. Michie et al.
Trifiletti, L.B., Gielen, A.C., Sleet, D.A., & Hopkins, K. (2005). Behavioral and social sciences
theories and models: are they used in unintentional injury prevention research? Health Education
Research ,20, 298–307.
UK Department of Health (2004). Choosing health? Making healthy choices easier . London:
Department of Health.
US Department of Health and Human Services (2000). Healthy people 2010: Understanding and
improving health conference . Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Williams, K., Prevost, A.T., Griffin, S., Hardeman, W., Hollingworth, W., Spiegelhalter, D., et al.
(2004). The ProActive trial protocol – a randomized controlled trial of the efficacy of a
family-based, domiciliary intervention programme to increase physical activity amongstindividuals at high risk of diabetes. BMC Public Health ,4, 48–84.
World Health Organization. (2002). WHO mega country health promotion network: Behavioral risk
factor surveillance guide . Geneva: World Health Organization.
Zimmerman, R.S., & Noar, S.M. (2005). Health behavior theory and cumulative knowledge
regarding health behaviors: Are we moving in the right direction? Health Education Research:
Theory & Practice ,20, 275–290.Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change 39
