Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: 1743-7199 (Print) 1743-7202 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Can you elaborate on that? Addressing
participants ’ need for cognition in computer-
tailored health behavior interventions
I. A. Nikoloudakis, R. Crutzen, A. L. Rebar, C. Vandelanotte, P. Quester, M.
Dry, A. Skuse, M. J. Duncan & C. E. Short
To cite this article:  I. A. Nikoloudakis, R. Crutzen, A. L. Rebar, C. Vandelanotte, P. Quester,
M. Dry, A. Skuse, M. J. Duncan & C. E. Short (2018) Can you elaborate on that? Addressing
participants ’ need for cognition in computer-tailored health behavior interventions, Health
Psychology Review, 12:4, 437-452, DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2018.1525571
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1525571
View supplementary material 
Published online: 22 Oct 2018.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 951
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 13 View citing articles 

Can you elaborate on that? Addressing participants ’need for
cognition in computer-tailored health behavior interventions
I. A. Nikoloudakisa*, R. Crutzenb, A. L. Rebarc, C. Vandelanottec, P. Questerd, M. Drye,
A. Skusef, M. J. Duncang,hand C. E. Shorta*
aFreemasons Foundation Centre for Men ’s Health, School of Medicine, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia;
bDepartment of Health Promotion/CAPHRI, Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands;cPhysical Activity
Research Group, Appleton Institute, School of Health, Medical and Applied Sciences, Central Queensland University,
Rockhampton, Australia;dProfessor in Marketing, Adelaide Business School, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide,
Australia;eSchool of Psychology, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia;fAnthropology and Development
Studies, University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia;gSchool of Medicine & Public Health, Faculty of Health and
Medicine, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia;hPriority Research Centre for Physical Activity and
Nutrition, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan, Australia
ABSTRACT
Computer-tailored interventions, which deliver health messages adjusted
based on characteristics of the message recipient, can e ﬀectively
improve a range of health behaviours. Typically, the content of the
message is tailored to user demographics, health behaviours and social
cognitive factors (e.g., intentions, attitudes, self-eﬃ cacy, perceived social
support) to increase message relevance, and thus the extent to whichthe message is read, considered and translated into attitude and
behaviour change. Some researchers have suggested that the e ﬃcacy of
computer-tailored interventions may be further enhanced by adapting
messages to suit recipients ’need for cognition (NFC) –a personality trait
describing how individuals tend to process information. However, thelikely impact of doing so, especially when tailored in conjunction with
other variables, requires further consideration. It is possible thatintervention e ﬀects may be reduced in some circumstances due to
interactions with other variables (e.g., perceived relevance) that alsoinﬂuence information processing. From a practical point of view, it is
also necessary to consider how to optimally operationalise and measureNFC if it is to be a useful tailoring variable. This paper aims to facilitatefurther research in this area by critically examining these issues based
on relevant theories and existing evidence.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 19 September 2017
Accepted 15 September 2018
KEYWORDS
Need for cognition;
computer-tailoring;elaboration likelihood model;
eHealth; behaviour change;
health communication
Introduction
Digital health interventions have the potential to improve a range of health-related behaviours. They
are often more accessible than face-to-face interventions and may be able to reach large target popu-lation groups that would otherwise be unlikely to participate in interventions (Fuller & Kroese, 2015 ).
Evidence has consistently shown that digital interventions using computer-tailoring to present indi-viduals with personalised health information are signi ﬁcantly more likely to improve health-related
behaviours than those delivering generic information (Lustria et al., 2013 ; Short, James, Plotniko ﬀ,
& Girgis, 2011 ; Wolfenden, Nathan, & Williams, 2015 ). Nevertheless, as the overall e ﬀect sizes of
© 2018 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT C. E. Short camille.short@adelaide.edu.au
*Both these authors contributed equally to this work.
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed at https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1525571HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW
2018, VOL. 12, NO. 4, 437 –452
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1525571
computer-tailored health interventions remain small (Lustria et al., 2013 ), there have been recent calls
for researchers to further investigate how to improve their eﬀ ectiveness (Smit, Linn, & van Weert,
2015 ).
Computer-tailoring involves matching intervention messages to participant characteristics based
on responses to one or more assessments. Software is used to automate the process, relying on algor-
ithms that link individuals ’assessment data to particular messages in a pre-speci ﬁed message library
(Kreuter, Farrell, Olevitch, & Brennan, 2000 ). To date, computer-tailored interventions have most often
tailored the content of the message to match recipients ’demographic factors, social cognitive deter-
minants of behaviour (e.g., their self-e ﬃcacy, intentions, social support) and/or current health behav-
iour (Brug, Steenhuis, van Assema, Glanz, & De Vries, 1999 ; Spittaels, De Bourdeaudhuij, &
Vandelanotte, 2007 ). More recently, there has been a push to focus not only on what information
is included in the message but also on how the information is communicated, as this could
impact on persuasion (e.g., attitude change) and potentially the magnitude of the behavioural
change (Fuller & Kroese, 2015 ;O’Keefe & Jensen, 2007 ; Short et al., 2011 ; Smit et al., 2015 ; Vandela-
notte et al., 2015 ). In particular, previous research suggests that matching health information to users ’
information processing style, such as their need for cognition (NFC), may be a promising avenue topursue (Smit et al., 2015 ). However, several theoretical and practical considerations must ﬁrst be con-
sidered before developing new interventions based on NFC.
NFC refers to an individual ’s tendency to engage in, and enjoy, e ﬀortful cognitive activities
(Cacioppo & Petty, 1982 ). Those with a higher NFC tend to seek information actively and think
deeply and critically about the arguments presented. Those with lower NFC tend to invest less cog-
nitive e ﬀort when processing information, relying more on mental short-cuts such as cognitive heur-
istics (e.g., ‘experts are correct ’) or the source of the information (e.g., celebrities, experts) to
understand the information presented (Cacioppo, Petty, Feinstein, & Jarvis, 1996 ). In computer-tai-
lored interventions, NFC could be used as a tailoring variable, with message style matched to recipi-
ents’processing style. However, the likely impact of doing so, especially when tailored in conjunction
with other variables requires further consideration. It is possible that intervention eﬀ ects could be
reduced in some circumstances due to adverse interactions with other variables. From a practicalpoint of view, further consideration of how to optimally operationalise and measure NFC is alsoneeded. The usefulness of NFC, or any other variable, as a predictor of information processing and
thus as a useful tailoring variable is only as good as its operationalization and our ability to
measure it (Peters & Crutzen, 2017 ). This paper aims to facilitate further research in this area by
addressing these considerations.
Theoretical considerations
Computer-tailored interventions are commonly based on the premise that behaviour change isdriven by changes in social cognitive determinants (e.g., attitudes, eﬃcacy beliefs, intentions;Lustria et al., 2013 ; Wolfenden et al., 2015 ). There are many psychosocial models of health behaviour
that have informed this view, including the Theory of Planned Behaviour (Ajzen, 1985 ), Social Cogni-
tive Theory (Bandura, 1986 ) and the Health Belief Model (Abraham & Sheeran, 2015 ). Although there
are nuanced di ﬀerences between these models in terms of the determinants speci ﬁed and the mech-
anisms for which they work, there is also considerable overlap. For the most part, each suggests thatpeople make behavioural intentions based on deliberation of their beliefs (e.g., attitudes and self-eﬃcacy beliefs) and behaviour change occurs through the translation of intention into action
(Bandura, 2004 ). The primary strategy for inﬂ uencing these determinants in computer-tailored inter-
ventions has been the provision of information. For example, an intervention may provide detailsabout the bene ﬁts of a healthy diet. The underlying assumption is that such information may per-
suade a person to have more valued attitudes of the bene ﬁts of eating well and therefore lead
the person to make intentions to eat more fruit and vegetables or to strengthen their commitmentto enacting their intentions than if they had not received that information. This in turn, according to438 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
the theories outlined above, should lead to increased behaviour change. There is experimental evi-
dence to support this proposition (i.e., that intentions causally in ﬂuence behaviour), however, it
should be noted that medium-large changes in intentions have typically resulted in small-medium
changes in behaviour (Webb & Sheeran, 2006 ). This has led to an increased interest into how to
ensure computer-tailored interventions have a large impact on intentions, and/or how to inﬂ uence
behaviour via other mechanisms (e.g., habitual processes, Kwasnicka et al., 2017 ). Consideration of
the Elaboration Likelihood Model (ELM) of persuasion (Petty & Cacioppo, 1986 ) and other dual
process theories are important to consider in this context.
The ELM is an information processing theory often applied to explain why computer-tailored inter-
ventions that adapt message content to increase message relevance are more eﬀ ective at changing
behaviour than generic, one-size- ﬁts-all interventions (Kreuter et al., 2000 ; Short, James, & Plotniko ﬀ,
2013 ). According to the ELM, there are two routes to persuasion, the central route and the peripheral
route. Information is processed via the central route when participants have the ability, opportunity,
resources and motivation to process information more elaborately. It involves in-depth informationprocessing and thoughtful consideration of the information presented. Conversely, information pro-
cessed via the peripheral route requires fewer resources and less motivation to process information,
as it relies on the use of simple cognitive processes, such as the use of heuristics, biases, and a ﬀect
(Petty & Cacioppo, 1986 ). Although persuasion can occur via either route, computer-tailoring inter-
ventionists have focused almost exclusively on persuasion via the central route. Petty, Barden, andWheeler ( 2009 ) argue that this should result in longer lasting intervention eﬀ ects since attitude
change that occurs via the central route should be relatively enduring and resistant to counter per-
suasion compared to attitudes formed based on peripheral cues. This proposition is based on the
implication that greater elaboration occurs in central route processing, which is thought to resultin the new information, or one’s personal translation of the new information, being integrated
into the individuals underlying belief structure and committed to memory. The integration of infor-
mation into one’ s belief structure increases the likelihood that incongruent messages will be disre-
garded or critiqued.
In most computer-tailored interventions, e ﬀorts to induce central route processing involve
increasing the personal relevance of the health messages provided. For example, in a physical activityintervention, super ﬂuous information about exercising at work can be omitted if it is known that the
message recipient is unemployed. Likewise, information of interest to the individual can be added iftheir main motivation for exercise is known (e.g., weight loss). According to the ELM, perceived per-sonal relevance is the primary factor for increasing motivation to process information elaborately
(Cacioppo et al., 1996 ). When perceived personal relevance is high, message recipients are more
likely to engage in central route processing. When perceived personal relevance is low motivation
for elaborate processing wanes and recipients are more likely to engage in peripheral route proces-
sing. On this basis, the goal of computer-tailored interventions has been to ensure that the relevance
of the health messages provided is high. Consistent ﬁndings showing that computer-tailored inter-
ventions are more likely to be read, remembered, discussed and perceived by the reader as interest-
ing than non-tailored interventions support this practice (Brug et al., 1999 ; Kreuter et al., 2000 ;
Spittaels, De Bourdeaudhuij, Brug, & Vandelanotte, 2006 ). However, it is possible that tailoring mess-
ages based on other factors that inﬂ uence motivation and ability to process information may yield
similar or even greater results.
The ELM states that NFC also in ﬂuences motivation and ability to process information. Typically,
those with a higher NFC are predisposed to process information via the central route and thosewith a lower NFC tend to process information via the peripheral route. Thus, to tailor information
based on NFC, one could provide high NFC individuals with materials optimised for central route pro-cessing (e.g., messages containing statistics and facts) and those with a lower NFC with materials opti-
mised for peripheral route processing (e.g., messages containing strong a ﬀective or credibility cues,
seeFigure 1 ). This may facilitate deeper processing among those inclined to process information via
the central route (i.e., those with high NFC), and ensure appropriate and persuasive peripheral cuesHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 439
are available to those most likely to rely on these cues to form their attitudes and beliefs (i.e., those
with low NFC). While some have argued that peripheral messages may lead to shorter-lasting inter-vention e ﬀects due to less ingrained attitude formation (Petty et al., 2009 ), this is not necessarily the
case. Early behaviourist theories such as classical conditioning (Staats & Staats, 1958 ) as well as more
contemporary dual process theories (Strack & Deutsch, 2004 ), are especially relevant to consider.
According to these theories, attitudes (e.g., physical activity is pleasurable) and/or behavioural in ﬂu-
ences (e.g., habits) may be formed and potentially sustained through exposure to repeated pairingsof two concepts. It may be possible to design peripheral route messages based on this concept. It isalso possible that peripheral route messages could reduce non-usage attrition in computer-tailored
intervention through increased enjoyment (e.g., through use of humour as an a ﬀective cue, Zhang,
1996 ) and/or a reduction in cognitive burden (associated with elaborative information processing;
Petty & Cacioppo, 1986 ). These theory-based ideas are worth exploring in today ’s context, where
the delivery of tailored messages using websites and mobile applications allows for repeated
exposure at a low cost, and where non-usage attrition issues with central route style interventionsare consistently noted (and often attributed to a boring or taxing user experience; Short, Rebar, Plot-
nikoﬀ , & Vandelanotte, 2015 ).
Some studies, described in more detail below, suggest that tailoring messages based on NFC
alone may enhance persuasion and produce positive intervention eﬀ ects on behaviour. However,
a major limitation of this work, and arguably the tailoring ﬁeld in general, is that the interaction
between NFC and personal relevance has rarely been considered. This is necessary as processing
diﬀerences based on NFC are only hypothesised to exist when health promotion materials are
Figure 1. Top left. Webpage designed for individuals with low NFC. Reducing cognitive load and relying on image to convey posi-
tive bene ﬁts. Bottom images. Webpages designed for individuals with high NFC. Use of factual explanation to convey positive
beneﬁts of exercise.440 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
perceived as moderately relevant (Cacioppo et al., 1996 ). When messages are very high in relevance,
all recipients are hypothesised to engage in elaborate processing, regardless of NFC. Likewise, when
relevance is very low, all recipients are thought to employ peripheral route processing. Therefore, if
computer-tailored interventions are e ﬀective in increasing relevance, then providing messages tai-
lored based on NFC (especially with low NFC recipients) may become less persuasive. This would
suggest that a detrimental interaction between NFC and relevance could be observed. Ultimately,
this will depend on how much improvements in perceived relevance can be achieved via compu-
ter-tailoring.
Another thing to consider is that the central route and peripheral route processing systems may
operate in parallel and interact to inﬂ uence each other. According to some dual process theories,
Cognitive Experiential Self-Theory (Epstein, 2003 ) for example, non-conscious information processing,
which is automatic, a ﬀect-based, and intuitive can bias conscious and rationale reasoning, including
among those with high NFC. This implies that peripheral cues, which are automatically assessed whenviewing a stimuli, are still likely to have an impact on those with high NFC, albeit more indirectly. Forexample, when a person with high NFC receives a message, automatic processing of peripheral cues
(e.g., heuristics about source, a ﬀective response) may bias message elaboration and in turn a ﬀect jud-
gement (Epstein, 2003 ; Petty, Briñol, Loersch, & McCaslin, 2009 ; Wegener, Clark, & Petty, 2006 ). This
would suggest that to optimise intervention materials for individuals with a high NFC both centralroute and peripheral route information processing should be considered.
Practical considerations for future research
Is tailoring on NFC likely to be e ﬀective?
While dozens of randomised trials have examined the eﬃ cacy of tailoring based on demographics,
psychosocial variables and behaviour (e.g., Lustria et al., 2013 ; Short et al., 2011 ; Wolfenden et al.,
2015 ), to the best of our knowledge there are no randomised trials examining the impact of tailoring
based on NFC compared to a control (e.g., usual care, wait-list). Research on this topic so far has
focused on examining the impact of receiving matched versus mismatched NFC messages (whichis referred to as testing the ‘matching hypothesis ’). Exploring this research is valuable for considering
the likely impact of tailoring based on NFC alone (i.e., where everyone receives a message matched totheir NFC). To this end, we conducted a narrative review of the literature. To identify key articles wesearched 10 databases (Google Scholar, PsycINFO, Scopus, PubMed, Embase, Psychology & Behav-
ioural Sciences Collection, Medline, ClinicalKey Australia, CINAHL and Academic OneFile), using key-
words (e.g., ‘need for cognition ’, and ‘health ’or‘behavior ’), and names of authors published in this
area. From this, we identi ﬁed eight relevant studies (see Table 1 ). With one exception (Conner,
Rhodes, Morris, McEachan, & Lawton, 2011 ), all examined whether tailoring messages based on
NFC has an impact on social cognitive determinants of behaviour (e.g., intentions, attitudes,norms). However, only four assessed the impact on behaviour. One of these studies used an objective
measure (Williams-Piehota, Schneider, Pizarro, Mowad, & Salovey, 2003 ), the remaining three utilised
self-reported health behaviour measures (Conner et al., 2011 ; Latimer et al., 2008 ; Williams-Piehota,
Pizarro, Navarro Silvera, Mowad, & Salovey, 2006 ).
Of the seven studies examining impact of matched interventions on changes in social cognitive
constructs, four reported increased persuasion when messages were matched based on NFC on at
least one social cognitive outcome (Bakker, 1999 ; Braverman, 2008 ; Carnaghi, Cadinu, Castelli,
Kiesner, & Bragantini, 2007 ; Conner et al., 2011 ; Vidrine, Simmons, & Brandon, 2007 ). However in
one study this was observed for one sub-group only (occasional versus daily smokers; Vidrineet al., 2007 ), and in three of the studies it was observed for some social cognitive outcomes but
not others (Bakker, 1999 ; Carnaghi et al., 2007 ; Vidrine et al., 2007 ). Furthermore, one study reported
ﬁndings to the contrary of the matching hypothesis. Speci ﬁcally, Latimer et al. ( 2008 ) found that
detailed messages were more e ﬀective with those with low NFC for increasing intentions thanHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 441
Table 1. A review of studies assessing the e ﬀect of matching health messages to individuals ’NFC on persuasion and behaviour change.
First author
(date)Intervention
target NFC measurePsychometric
properties of
NFC measureCut-o ﬀ
measureMode of
intervention Message typeRelevant outcome variables of
interest Main ﬁndings
Studies assessing whether tailoring messages based on need for cognition has an impact on the antecedents of behaviourBakker ( 1999 ) Condom use 18-item, 5-point NFC
scale (JohnT. Cacioppo et al.,
1984 )Cronbach ’s
α= .81Median split Brochures High NFC message: concise,
written information. Low NFC
message: cartoon that was
airy, humorous and less
detailed. Control condition: nomessage.Knowledge about AIDS; attitude
toward condom use; andsubjective norms regarding
condom use.
All assessments conducted insame sitting.Message type × NFC interaction was
signiﬁcant for attitude toward
condom use ( F(2, 113) = 3.06,
p< .05)
*†and subjective norms
(F(2, 113) = 7.23, p< .001)*†but not
for knowledge ( F< 1).
Braverman
(2008 )Water
consumption18-item, 5-point NFC
scale (Cacioppoet al., 1984 )Cronbach ’s
α= .92Median split Written and audio Informational message: factual,
impersonal, medically andprofessionally written.Testimonial message:
contained the same
information, presented as astory.Emotional absorption
All assessments conducted insame sitting.Message type × NFC interaction was
signiﬁcant for emotional absorption
(F(1, 150) = 4.42, p< .04, d= .34).
†§
Carnaghi et al.
(2007 )Safe sex
behaviour18-item, 5-point NFC
scale (JohnT. Cacioppo et al.,1984 ), translated
in ItalianCronbach ’s
α= .97Median split Pamphlets High NFC message: text only.
Low NFC message: comic stripformat. Control condition: nomessage.Instrumental attitude
(knowledge and attitudestoward HIV-preventablebehaviours); instrumentalnorm (subjective normsregarding safe sex behaviours
and motivation to comply
with them).Message type × NFC interaction was
signiﬁcant for instrumental
attitudes ( F(2, 102) = 327.99,
p<.001)
*†and instrumental norms
(F(2, 102) = 343.36, p< .001).*†
Vidrine et al.
(2007 )Smokers ’health-
risk perceptions18-item NFC scale
(John T. Cacioppoet al., 1984 )Not assessed in
study.N/A Pamphlets Factual pamphlet: described
health risks associated withsmoking using logical, well-documented, and objectivelyveriﬁable information.
Evaluative pamphlet:described the risks in terms of
emotional, impressionistic
and subjective statements.Control pamphlet: unrelatedto smoking.Smoking relevant knowledge;
primary smoking-relevantrisk-perception outcomes(perceptions of absolutegeneral and speci ﬁc personal
risk); secondary perceptionoutcomes (perceptions of
speci ﬁc personal risk relative
to other smokers, perceptions
of risk speci ﬁc to women and
men and perceptions ofgeneral risk); behaviouralexpectations of adopting thebehaviour.All assessments conducted insame sitting.For occasional smokers, NFC ×
message type interactionsigniﬁcantly predicted perceptions
of absolute general personal risk((β=–.74), t(90) = –2.49, p< .05)
and perceptions of speci ﬁc risk
relative to other smokers (( β
=–.74), t(87) = –2.30 p< .05).
*†
No interaction e ﬀects on pamphlet-
relevant knowledge andbehavioural expectations ofchanging smoking behaviour.For daily smokers, NFC × pamphlettype interaction was not related toany risk perception outcomes, orpamphlet-relevant knowledge and
behavioural expectations of
changing smoking behaviour.442 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
Studies assessing whether tailoring messages based on need for cognition has an impact on behaviour
Latimer et al.
(2008 )Discussing cancer
clinical trialswith physiciansThree items from the
NFC scale(Cacioppo et al.,
1984 ) (baseline
measure); 18-
item, 5-point NFCscale(John T. Cacioppoet al., 1984 )
(mailed survey)Cronbach ’s
α= .72 (3-
item scale);
Cronbach ’s
α= .86
(mailed
survey)Low NFC was
–1 SD from
mean NFC
score and
high NFCwas +1 SDfrom meanNFC scorePhone messages
and informationbookletsDetailed message: included
more statistics and in-depthdescriptions of clinical trials.
Non-detailed message:
provided basicinformation and messagecues (e.g. celebrity advocacy).Social Cognitive Determinant
Intention of discussing clinicaltrials with their physician;
participants ’understanding of
clinical trials
BehaviourWhether participants haddiscussed clinical trialinformation with theirphysicians).Assessed three points in time(baseline, 1 week, 6 weeks
post-baseline).Social Cognitive Determinant
Message type × NFC interaction
was not signi ﬁcant for
understanding. However, theinteraction was signi ﬁcant for
intentions ( R
2
change = .03, β=–.23,
p= .02).‡§Low NFC individuals in
the detailed condition had greater
intentions than low NFC individualsin the non-detailed condition. Nodiﬀerences in intention observed
for individuals with High NFC based
on message type.
BehaviourNo NFC × message interaction onbehaviour.
Conner et al.
(2011 )Exercise behavior 18-item, 5-point NFC
scale (JohnT. Cacioppo et al.,1984 )Cronbach ’s
α= .81Median split Not speci ﬁed Cognitive message:
stated instrumental bene ﬁts
of exercise (e.g. regularexercise reduces risk ofcancer). A ﬀective message:
stated aﬀ ective bene ﬁts of
exercise (e.g. regular physicalactivity reduces anxiety). No-message control condition.Behaviour
Self-reported exercisebehaviour.Assessed at baseline and threeweeks post-baseline.Behaviour
Time × condition × NFC interactionwas signi ﬁcant ( F(2, 110) = 4.89,
p< .01, d= 0.60).
In the low NFC group, exercise
behaviour signi ﬁcantly increased
across time points in the a ﬀective
message condition ( t(14) = 6.23,
p< .001), but not in the control or
cognitive message conditions ( t<
1.4). This was observed among
individuals with high NFC as well,but was due to baseline exercisediﬀerences between the three
conditions. It was concluded thatthe impact of aﬀ ective messages on
exercise behaviour was onlyconsistent for individuals with lowNFC.
Williams-
Piehota et al.(2003 )Mammography
utilizationThree items from the
NFC scale(John T. Cacioppoet al., 1984 )Cronbach ’s
α= .69Median split Phone messages,
refrigeratormagnets andpamphlets.High NFC messages:
emphasised the facts,included statistics andencouraged mammography
utilization in a detailed
manner.Low NFC messages: fewerdetails on each subtopic,included celebrity advocacy.Social cognitive determinants
Intention of getting amammographyBehaviour mammography
utilization.Assessed immediately afterphone message, six monthsand 12 months later.Social cognitive determinants
No main e ﬀects. NFC × message
type interaction not signi ﬁcant.
Behaviour
At
6-month follow-up participants
receiving matched messages were
2.77 times more likely to get amammogram than participantswith mismatched messages,however NFC × message typeinteraction not signi ﬁcant ( p= .07).
Also no signi ﬁcant interaction at 12
months.
(Continued )HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 443
Table 1. Continued.
First author
(date)Intervention
target NFC measurePsychometric
properties of
NFC measureCut-o ﬀ
measureMode of
intervention Message typeRelevant outcome variables of
interest Main ﬁndings
Williams-
Piehota et al.(2006 )Fruit and
vegetableintakeThree items from the
NFC scale(Cacioppo et al.,1984 )Cronbach ’s
α= .77Median split Phone messages,
brochures; ‘5a
day ’pencil;
refrigerator
magnets; recipe
cards; tip card.Participants inreceived a briefeducationalmessage andthree mailingsover four months.Complex messages: emphasised
facts and was detailed,provided more scienti ﬁc
evidence and less pictures
compared to low NFC
message. Simple messages:contained more pictures thanthe high NFC condition andincluded celebrity advocacy.Social Cognitive determinants
Motivation to increase fruitand vegetable; intention toconsume more fruit and
vegetables; knowledge of
current fruit and vegetableguidelines. Assessed atbaseline, one month and fourmonths follow-up.BehaviourFruit and vegetable intakemeasured using foodfrequency questionnaire at
baseline, one month and four
months follow-up.Social Cognitive determinants
Main e ﬀect at 1 months but not 4
months on intentions, with morecomplex messages resulting in
greater intentions. No main e ﬀect
of message type on knowledge. No
NFC × message interaction on anyoutcomes.BehaviourMain e ﬀect at 1 and 4 months, with
participants receiving morecomplex messages reportinggreater behaviour change. No
NFC × message type interaction at
either time-point.
Notes: NFC: need for cognition; SD: standard deviation.* Individuals high in need for cognition were more persuaded by the central route message than the peripheral route message.
†Individuals low in need for cognition were more persuaded by the peripheral route message than the central route message.
§Individuals high in need for cognition were equally persuaded by the central route and peripheral route messages.
‡Individuals low in need for cognition were more persuaded by the central route message.444 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
simple messages. Of the four studies assessing behavioural outcomes, only one reported a signi ﬁcant
interaction between NFC and message type on behaviour. This study partially supports the matching
hypothesis. Conner et al. ( 2011 ) reported that a ﬀective messages were overall more e ﬀective than
cognitive messages at increasing exercise participation for those with low NFC. However, messagetype was not associated with behaviour change among those with high NFC.
Overall, the results of these studies suggest that tailoring based on NFC may have an impact on
intervention persuasion (changes in social cognitive determinants) and possibly eﬃcacy, however,the evidence-base is mixed and inconclusive. Further investigation is needed as to why the matchinghypothesis has not been supported in some studies. This may be due to di ﬀerences in intervention
modality (e.g., print versus telephone), targets (determinants of behaviour versus behaviour change;and di ﬀerences in behaviours) and/or content, including how peripheral cues are used in each con-
dition (Epstein, 2003 ). It could also be a function of the way NFC is operationalised (e.g., ‘aﬀective ’vs
‘cognitive ’,‘simple message ’vs‘complex message ’), measured (e.g., questionnaire using three items
or 18 items) and/or categorised (e.g., median split versus distance from mean; see Table 1 ). The inter-
vention content can impact directly on the persuasion process (based on the communication strat-
egies chosen), and thus future research in this area is particularly needed. Consideration of the
Cognitive Experiential Self Theory (Epstein, 2003 ) is recommended.
Whether or not NFC should be tailored in conjunction with other state or person-level factors are
another area requiring further investigation. Our search did not identify any studies in this area,although one study examined the moderating role of NFC in a smoking cessation intervention inwhich tailoring was based on psychosocial determinants of behaviour and smoking behaviour
(Haug et al., 2010 ). In this study, NFC was assessed at baseline and found to moderate intervention
eﬀects on smoking cessation self-e ﬃcacy, with the tailored intervention resulting in higher self-
eﬃcacy in high NFC individuals only. These ﬁndings suggest that tailoring psychosocial messages
to increase relevance and thus increase central route processing, may not be as eﬀ ective at persuad-
ing individuals with a low NFC. For them, messages that evoke positive emotions and rely on other
peripheral cues may be more e ﬀective (Chartrand, van Baaren, & Bargh, 2006 ). To examine this
further, future tailoring studies should assess NFC, personal relevance and current states such asaﬀect, emotions, and self-control. Additionally, it is important for future eﬀ orts to explore moderating
eﬀects on intervention outcomes. Experimental studies comparing di ﬀerent types of tailoring (e.g.,
NFC only versus various other variables or both) should also be conducted. Studies exploring tailoringbased on a ﬀective state are particularly encouraged, given that a ﬀect can in ﬂuence information pro-
cessing outside of conscious awareness, and that this may manifest in di ﬀerent ways among those
with high and low NFC (Epstein, 2003 ; Petty et al., 2009 ;
Wegener et al., 2006 ). As such, it may be
necessary to adapt messages based on both a ﬀective state and NFC. A greater understanding of
how these two variables interact (and the in ﬂuence of other possible state or trait moderators) is
needed to guide further research in this area. Such research may help to guide the developmentof more persuasive computer-tailored interventions. This may boost the eﬃcacy of these interven-tions through larger changes in social cognitive determinants than has previously been achieved,
however additional strategies (e.g., self-monitoring, point-of-decision prompts) may be needed to
help bridge the intention-behaviour gap (Webb & Sheeran, 2006 ).
How to assess NFC: decreasing or eliminating response burden
Tailored messages are usually selected based on users ’responses to one or more assessments. Ideally,
questionnaires should be short to reduce the response burden of participants and ensure a positiveuser experience of the intervention (Rolstad, Adler, & Rydén, 2011 ). The most commonly used self-
report measure of NFC, as indicated in Table 1 , is the 18-item NFC scale (Cacioppo, Petty, & Feng
Kao, 1984 ). Higher values on the NFC scale represent higher NFC. While this scale has strong
psychometric properties (Cacioppo et al., 1984 ; Cacioppo et al., 1996 ; Forsterlee & Ho, 1999 ; Petty,
Cacioppo, & Kao, 1984 ; Sadowski, 1993 ; Waters & Zakrajsek, 1990 ), the length is suboptimal for aHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 445
computer-tailored intervention, especially if other tailoring variables also need to be measured prior
to providing personalised feedback. To address this issue, some researchers have used only threeitems from the 18-item scale, selected for their high factor loadings (Latimer et al., 2008 ; Williams-
Piehota et al., 2003 ; Williams-Piehota et al., 2006 ). As the 3-item scale ’s psychometric properties
were previously unknown, we compared the internal structure of the 18-item scale to the 3-itemscale.
Cross-sectional data for these analyses were collected during November –December 2014 from indi-
viduals who are part of the Longitudinal Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) Panel (Wave 7) forCentERdata in Tilburg University, Netherlands. Every year, a large Internet-based survey is administered
to the LISS Panel. The Panel is representative of the Dutch population aged 16 years or older as it is
based on a probability sample of households drawn from the population register (Bruinsma &Crutzen, 2018 ;D eV o s , 2010 ). Panel members provided informed consent and the con ﬁdentiality of par-
ticipants ’responses was maintained. While the survey assesses a number of domains (such as edu-
cation, personality and political views) for the purposes of these analyses, only demographics andresponses to the 18-item NFC scale scored on a 7-point Likert scale (response options range 0 –6;
scale range 0 –108) were used. Analyses were conducted using Stata version 11 (StataCorp, 2009 )
and R (Team, 2015 ). LISS panel members, consisting of 7739 individuals, were invited to complete
the survey and 6561 (84.8%) responded. Respondents who omitted one or more items from the
NFC scale were excluded from the analyses ( N= 116, 1.77%), producing a dataset of 6445 participants.
This sample consisted of 53% females. Respondents, on average, were 45 years of age (SD = 17.58) and
the NFC mean sum score was 59.79 (SD = 16.66; range = 0 –108; see Figure 2 ).
The results revealed that there was a strong positive correlation between the 18-item and 3-item
NFC scales ( r= .86, p< .001). Unidimensionality of the 3-item scale was con ﬁrmed through explora-
tory factor analysis (see Appendix 1). Interestingly, a two-factor solution was identi ﬁed as the best
ﬁt for the 18-item scale, consisting of a dominant ﬁrst component with nine positively framed
items and a second component based on nine negatively framed items. This has been observed pre-viously (Bors, Vigneau, & Lalande, 2006 ; Vigneau & Lalande, 2006 ), and has been attributed to the
impact of vocabulary when interpreting the negatively worded items (Bors et al., 2006 ). This may
have implications for tailoring based on NFC scores when using the 18-item scale, especially in popu-lations where verbal abilities are low. In such cases, it may be more desirable to use the 3-item scale.
Figure 2. The distribution of NFC scores among participants in the LISS Panel ( N= 6445). Scale range is 0– 108. Mean = 59.79 (SD =
16.66), Median = 59.446 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
Overall, the internal structure of the 3-item scale, based on Omega (McDonald, 2013 ), appears reason-
able. While all studies reported in Table 1 used Cronbach ’s alpha to assess the internal structure of the
NFC scale, except for Vidrine et al. ( 2007 ), Omega is a more accurate index of a scale ’s internal struc-
ture (Crutzen & Peters, 2017 ; McNeish, 2018 ) as its assumptions are more likely to be met (i.e., alpha
relies on the essentially tau-equivalent model, which assumes unidimensionality and equal variances
of, and covariances between, items). The Omega of the 3-item scale was 0.76. (95% CI: .75, .77). This
was lower than the Omega of the 18-item scale (Omega = .89, 95% CI: .89, .90), but remains satisfac-
tory. On balance, this reduction in reliability may be outweighed by the advantage of the 3-item scaleto reduce survey fatigue in participants, and possibly be less confounded by participants ’verbal abil-
ities. Given this, the 3-item scale seems a suitable measure to use in computer-tailored health behav-iour interventions studies, although further research is needed to assess its other psychometricproperties, including the content validity and test– retest reliability of the scale (DeVellis, 2016 ).
Another option for reducing response burden would be to avoid self-administered NFC surveys
and simply allow participants to self-select the type of health behaviour message they would liketo receive (Carnaghi et al., 2007 ). This could be facilitated by showing a preview of message
options or by describing options to users (e.g., ‘Would you prefer motivational or factual messages? ’
Or‘Would you prefer to read a comic or a health brochure to learn about HIV? ’). This would allow
users to select messages based on their processing preferences (Ferguson, Chung, & Weigold,
1985 ), and also based on their current state (e.g., mood and level of fatigue). This may improve atten-
tion to the message and increase the likelihood of positive a ﬀect when processing. With individuals
free to select the version that appealed to them most, feelings of autonomy may be greater, whichmay then increase internal motivation to engage with the intervention (Morrison, 2015 ). The appro-
priateness of this approach will depend on whether or not it is possible to communicate clearly the
message type. In some circumstances, it may be better for participants to be naïve of the messaging
strategy (e.g., to reduce demand characteristics, whereby participants change their behaviour to
conform to researcher expectations). It will also depend on whether or not message preferencesmap to processing tendency, and the relationship between current a ﬀective state, NFC, and
message type. This requires further examination.
How to determine cut-o ﬀpoints based on the (continuous) NFC variable
Researchers using a self-report measure to assess NFC, such as the 18-item or 3-item NFC scales, facethe problem of determining rational cut-points to tailor the content (e.g., when are participants
Table 2. Cut-point methods and values of population data to categorise participants based on need for cognition.
MethodCut-point description
(assuming a normal distribution)Cut-points using LISS
Panel data ( N= 6445).
Median split
Low NFC Median and below ≤59
High NFC Above median >59
Three categories based on SDs
Low NFC < –1 SD; 16% of population 0– 43.13
Moderate NFC 1 SD < 0 > –1 SD; 68% of population 43.14 –76.46
High NFC > 1 SD; 16% of population 76.47 –108
Five categories based on SDs
Very low NFC < –2 SD; 2.5% 0– 26.47
Low NFC 13.5% 26.48 –43.13
Moderate NFC 1 SD < 0 > –1 SD; 68% of population 43.14 –76.46
High NFC 13.5% 76.47 –93.12
Very high NFC >2 SD; 2.5% 93.13 –108
Tertile
Low NFC 1/3 of population 0– 53
Moderate NFC 1/3 of population 54 –67
High NFC 1/3 of population 68 –108
Notes: NFC: need for cognition; SD: standard deviation.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 447
considered as having a high NFC?). Table 2 presents several possible cut-point methods (e.g., median
split, standard deviation from the mean, tertiles) and their respective values, based on the LISS panel
data described above.
As indicated in Table 1 , the most common method of categorising individuals as low versus high in
NFC has been the median split. However, given that NFC is a continuous variable that is likely to benormally distributed (see Figure 2 ), this approach is problematic. It ignores that most individuals have
a moderate NFC, and treats those that fall on either side of the median as quanti ﬁably and arti ﬁcially
diﬀerent when, in reality, they are very similar. Although Table 1 demonstrates that some studies
were able to ﬁnd a statistically signi ﬁcant e ﬀect of NFC categorisation on the target health behaviour
or its antecedents, it is arguable that the e ﬀect size of these ﬁndings would have been greater had
another (more appropriate) approach been used to categorise participants (Fitzsimons, 2008 ). The
median-split approach also provides little insight into how those with a moderate NFC respond to
materials optimised for central or peripheral route processing.
Another option is to split NFC into three levels. This could be achieved by using tertiles (each con-
taining one-third of the population) or it could be based on the standard deviation from the mean ofthe population. Those close to the boundaries will still be similar to one another, however, this
approach at least allows con ﬁdence that those categorised as being low and high in NFC will be dis-
similar. As such, both of these approaches would allow developers to better match messages to NFC
level than the median split (at least for very low and very high scores). Of the two methods, using the
standard deviation to categorise NFC into three parts may be preferable. This approach recognisesthat NFC is normally distributed in the population (see Figure 2 ), whereas the tertile split erroneously
assumes that there are an equal proportion of individuals with low, moderate and high NFC in thepopulation. However, it should be noted that using this approach will result in the majority of partici-pants (68% based on Table 2 ) being categorised as moderate in NFC, and thus most participants
receiving the same messages.
Additional categories (e.g., using ﬁve categories by including a ‘very low NFC ’group and a ‘very
high NFC ’group) may assist researchers to better capture the individual variability of the NFC con-
struct. However, it is unclear how such tailored messages could be operationalised, and whetherthe additional time and cost of creating additional sets of messages would be warranted. Giventhis, the use of three categories appears to strike the best balance between capturing the individual
variability of the NFC construct, while ensuring the feasibility of designing a health promotion
message for each NFC category. This requires further investigation. To this end, researchers areencouraged to provide a detailed rationale of the cut-point used and to perform post hoc analyses
exploring their validity. For example, where a median split is used, researchers could conduct a recei-ver operating characteristic (ROC) analyses post hoc to determine how the utilised cut-point (i.e.,
median split) di ﬀers from the cut-point deemed optimal (in terms of speci ﬁcity and sensitivity) for
detecting intervention e ﬀects (Lasko, Bhagwat, Zou, & Ohno-Machado, 2005 ).
Operationalising health promotion messages tailored based on NFC
To develop health promotion messages for each NFC category, researchers ﬁrst need to operationa-
lise the NFC construct. As indicated in Table 1 , there is considerable variability in how this can be
achieved. This is particularly so for messages targeting low NFC individuals, as there are several poss-ible cues to focus on, including simple cues (e.g., source credibility, visual appeal, emotions) as well asmental shortcuts (e.g., ‘experts are correct’). As previous studies have favoured some cues over others,
or focused on di ﬀerent combinations of cues when designing messages, low NFC materials have
varied considerably between studies. Vidrine et al. ( 2007 ), for example, considered low NFC individ-
uals to rely more on emotional responses when evaluating information, and hence designed their low
NFC smoking cessation materials to communicate health risks via emotional, impressionistic and sub-
jective statements rather than facts. In contrast, Williams-Piehota et al. ( 2003 ) described individuals
with low NFC as low in motivation to employ cognitive eﬀ ort to process detailed health information,448 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
and thus designed mammogram screening materials that were simplistic, and used a celebrity endor-
sement to reinforce the limited details presented. Owing to the heterogeneity of studies (in terms ofintervention targets, length and methodological quality), it is di ﬃcult to determine if certain periph-
eral cues or combinations of peripheral cues are more persuasive than others. This is likely to dependon the context of the intervention. To help advance knowledge in this area, it is recommended thatresearchers describe in detail the theory and evidence-base behind the strategies they use, provide
examples of messages to facilitate replication of ﬁndings and conduct more experimental studies to
investigate what peripheral cues may be most salient for whom and in what circumstances.
Another factor needing further consideration is how to design messages for those with mod-
erate NFC, and in particular, to determine whether a hybrid approach can be used. When consid-
ering this point, it is important to recognise that the same content can be processed via either theperipheral or central route, depending on the cues being exploited. For example, information on
the source of a message can have an impact on attitudes because it has been carefully considered
and the recipient ﬁnds it credible (central route processing) or because the recipient has used a
mental short cut, such as ‘information from scientists is trustworthy’ (peripheral route processing).
As such, it may be possible to design messages in a way that allow for both peripheral and centralroute processing. This could be ideal for those with a moderate NFC, or indeed may reduce theoverall need for tailoring based on NFC when personal relevance is moderate to high. This is an
important area for future research, given that the LISS panel data suggest that the majority of the
population may have moderate levels of NFC, and given that computer-tailored interventions tendto be perceived as at least moderately personally relevant (Short et al., 2017 ; Ezendam, Noorde-
graaf, Kroeze, Brug, & Oenema, 2012 ; Hayman et al., 2017 ; Kanera et al., 2016 ). The extent to which
this can be achieved will ultimately depend on how compatible the two messaging approachesare. Though persuasion is often discussed as occurring by two distinct routes, in practice proces-
sing via these routes stretches across a continuum, ranging from subconscious processes to
minimal conscious processes to more elaborate conscious processes (Petty, Barden, & Wheeler,2002 ). How strategies exploiting the processing across this continuum could be combined to
better persuade individuals with low, moderate and high NFC, as well as the implications ofdoing so, clearly requires further investigation. It may be possible to design a single set ofmaterials that appeal to all levels of NFC.
Conclusion
This paper has discussed key theoretical and practical considerations regarding the tailoring ofhealth behaviour messages based on an individual ’s level of NFC. It is hoped that the information
presented within will assist researchers to operationalise and measure NFC and consider the impli-cations of developing and evaluating a new generation of tailored interventions; that is, interven-tions that adapt not just the message content, but also how the message is presented. To
progress science in this area, researchers developing such interventions are encouraged todescribe clearly their messaging approach (including theoretical reasoning), consider the role ofperceived personal relevance and a ﬀect on message processing, factor in those with moderate
NFC when designing intervention materials (given that they likely represent the majority of thepopulation), and to examine intervention e ﬃcacy in terms of both persuasion (changes in deter-
minants) and behaviour change. Research focused on behaviour change outcomes is particularly
needed, given the paucity of e ﬃcacy studies conducted to date, and the mixed nature of the evi-
dence available.
Acknowledgements
This article partly draws on data of the LISS panel of CentERdata.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 449
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
Funding
ALR (ID1105926) and CES (ID 1090517) are funded by the National Health and Medical Research Council of Australia. MJD
(ID100029) and CV (ID100427) are funded through a Future Leader Fellowship from the National Heart Foundation of
Australia. IAN was funded by Adelaide Summer Research Scholarships (Adelaide Medical School, University of Adelaide)in 2015 –2016 and 2016 –2017.
ORCID
R. Crutzen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3731-6610
M. J. Duncan http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9166-6195
References
Abraham, C., & Sheeran, P. ( 2015 ). The health behavior model. In M. C. P. Norman (Ed.), Predicting health behavior (pp. 28–
80). Philadelphia, PA: Open University Press.
Ajzen, I. ( 1985 ). From intentions to actions: A theory of planned behavior. In J. Kuhl & J. Beckman (Eds.), Action-control:
From cognition to behavior (pp. 11 –39). Heidelberg: Springer.
Bakker, A. B. ( 1999 ). Persuasive communication about AIDS prevention: Need for cognition determines the impact of
message format. AIDS Education and Prevention ,11(2), 150.
Bandura, A. ( 1986 ).Social foundations of thought and action: A social cognitive theory . Englewood Cli ﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Bandura, A. ( 2004 ). Health promotions by social cognitive means. Health Education and Behaviour ,31.doi:10.1177/
1090198104263660
Bors, D. A., Vigneau, F., & Lalande, F. ( 2006 ). Measuring the need for cognition: Item polarity, dimensionality, and the
relation with ability. Personality and Individual Di ﬀerences ,40(4), 819 –828.
Braverman, J. ( 2008 ). Testimonials versus informational persuasive messages: The moderating e ﬀect of delivery mode
and personal involvement. Communication Research, 35(5), 666 –694.
Brug, J., Steenhuis, I., van Assema, P., Glanz, K., & De Vries, H. ( 1999 ). Computer-tailored nutrition education: Di ﬀerences
between two interventions. Health Education Research ,14(2), 249 –256.
Bruinsma, J., & Crutzen, R. ( 2018 ). A longitudinal study on the stability of the need for cognition. Personality and Individual
Diﬀerences ,127, 151 –161.
Cacioppo, J. T., & Petty, R. E. ( 1982 ). The need for cognition. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,42(1), 116.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., Feinstein, J. A., & Jarvis, W. B. G. ( 1996 ). Dispositional di ﬀerences in cognitive motivation: The
life and times of individuals varying in need for cognition. Psychological Bulletin ,119(2), 197.
Cacioppo, J. T., Petty, R. E., & Feng Kao, C. ( 1984 ). The e ﬃcient assessment of need for cognition. Journal of Personality
Assessment ,48(3), 306 –307. doi:10.1207/s15327752jpa4803_13
Carnaghi, A., Cadinu, M., Castelli, L., Kiesner, J., & Bragantini, C. ( 2007 ). The best way to tell you to use a condom: The
interplay between message format and individuals ’level of need for cognition. AIDS Care ,19(3), 432 –440.
Chartrand, T. L., van Baaren, R. B., & Bargh, J. A. ( 2006 ). Linking automatic evaluation to mood and information processing
style: Consequences for experienced a ﬀect, impression formation, and stereotyping. Journal of Experimental
Psychology. General ,135(1), 70– 77.doi:10.1037/0096-3445.135.1.70
Conner, M., Rhodes, R. E., Morris, B., McEachan, R., & Lawton, R. ( 2011 ). Changing exercise through targeting a ﬀective or
cognitive attitudes. Psychology and Health ,26(2), 133 –149.
Crutzen, R., & Peters, G.-J. Y. ( 2017 ). Scale quality: Alpha is an inadequate estimate and factor-analytic evidence is needed
ﬁrst of all. Health Psychology Review ,11(3), 242 –247.
De Vos, K. ( 2010 ). Representativeness of the LISS-panel 2008, 2009, 2010. CentERdata, Tilburg .
DeVellis, R. F. ( 2016 ).Scale development: Theory and applications (Vol. 26) . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Epstein, S. ( 2003 ). Cognitive-experiential self-theory of personality. In T. Millon & M. J. Lerner (Eds.), Handbook of psychol-
ogy: Personality and social psychology (pp. 159 –184). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc.
Ezendam, N., Noordegraaf, V., Kroeze, W., Brug, J., & Oenema, A. ( 2012 ). Process evaluation of FATaintPHAT, a computer-
tailored intervention to prevent excessive weight gain among Dutch adolescents. Health Promotion International ,28
(1), 26– 35.
Ferguson, M., Chung, M., & Weigold, M. ( 1985 ).Need for cognition and the medium dependency components of reliance and
exposure . Paper presented at the meeting of the International Communication Association, Honolulu, HI.450 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
Fitzsimons, G. J. ( 2008 ). Death to dichotomizing. Journal of Consumer Research ,35(1), 5– 8.
Forsterlee, R., & Ho, R. ( 1999 ). An examination of the short form of the need for cognition scale applied in an Australian
sample. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 59(3), 471 –480.
Fuller, T., & Kroese, F. ( 2015 ). Tailor made for health psychology: Issues in the design and e ﬀectiveness of internet inter-
ventions. European Health Psychologist, 17(1), 2– 5.
Haug, S., Meyer, C., Ulbricht, S., Gross, B., Rumpf, H.-J., & John, U. ( 2010 ). Need for cognition as a predictor and a moderator
of outcome in a tailored letters smoking cessation intervention. Health Psychology ,29(4), 367.
Hayman, M., Reaburn, P., Browne, M., Vandelanotte, C., Alley, S., & Short, C. E. ( 2017 ). Feasibility, acceptability and e ﬃcacy
of a web-based computer-tailored physical activity intervention for pregnant women-the Fit4Two randomised con-
trolled trial. BMC Pregnancy and Childbirth ,17(1), 96.
Kanera, I. M., Willems, R. A., Bolman, C. A., Mesters, I., Zambon, V., Gijsen, B. C., & Lechner, L. ( 2016 ). Use and appreciation of
a tailored self-management eHealth intervention for early cancer survivors: Process evaluation of a randomized con-
trolled trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research ,18(8).
Kreuter, M. W., Farrell, D. W., Olevitch, L. R., & Brennan, L. K. ( 2000 ).Tailoring health messages: Customizing communication
with computer technology . Routledge.
Kwasnicka, D., Vandelanotte, C., Rebar, A., Gardner, B., Short, C., Duncan, M., …Hagger, M. S. ( 2017 ). Comparing motiva-
tional, self-regulatory and habitual processes in a computer-tailored physical activity intervention in hospital employ-ees–protocol for the PATHS randomised controlled trial. BMC Public Health ,17(1), 518.
Lasko, T. A., Bhagwat, J. G., Zou, K. H., & Ohno-Machado, L. ( 2005 ). The use of receiver operating characteristic curves in
biomedical informatics. Journal of Biomedical Informatics ,38(5), 404 –415.
Latimer, A. E., Williams-Piehota, P., Katulak, N. A., Cox, A., Salovey, P., & Mowad, L. ( 2008 ). Encouraging cancer patients to
talk to their physicians about clinical trials: Considering patients ’information needs. Journal of Applied Biobehavioural
research ,12(3-4), 178 –195.
Lustria, M. L. A., Noar, S. M., Cortese, J., Van Stee, S. K., Glueckauf, R. L., & Lee, J. ( 2013 ). A meta-analysis of web-delivered
tailored 
health behavior change interventions. Journal of Health Communication ,18(9), 1039 –1069.
McDonald, R. P. ( 2013 ).Test theory: A uni ﬁed treatment . New York: Psychology Press.
McNeish, D. ( 2018 ). Thanks coeﬃ cient alpha, we ’ll take it from here. Psychol Methods ,23(3), 412 –433.
Morrison, L. G. ( 2015 ). Theory-based strategies for enhancing the impact and usage of digital health behaviour change
interventions: A review. Digital Health ,1, 2055207615595335.
O’Keefe, D. J., & Jensen, J. D. ( 2007 ). The relative persuasiveness of gain-framed loss-framed messages for encouraging
disease prevention behaviors: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Health Communication, 12(7), 623 –644.
Peters, G.-J. Y., & Crutzen, R. ( 2017 ). Pragmatic nihilism: How a theory of nothing can help health psychology progress.
Health Psychology Review ,11(2), 103 –121. doi:10.1080/17437199.2017.1284015
Petty, R. E., Barden, J., & Wheeler, S. C. ( 2002 ). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion: Health promotions that
yield sustained behavioral change. In R. DiClemente, R. Crosby, & M. Kegler (Eds.), Emerging theories in health pro-
motion practice and research: Strategies for improving public health (pp. 71 –99). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Petty, R. E., Barden, J., & Wheeler, S. C. ( 2009 ). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion: Developing health pro-
motions for sustained behavioral change. In R. J. DiClemente, R. A. Crosby, & M. C. Kegler (Eds.), Emerging theories
in health promotion practice and research (pp. 185 –214). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass
Petty, R. E., Briñol, P., Loersch, C., & McCaslin, M. J. ( 2009 ). The need for cognition. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.),
Handbook of individual di ﬀerences in social behavior (pp. 318 –329). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Petty, R. E., & Cacioppo, J. T. ( 1986 ). The elaboration likelihood model of persuasion. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology ,19, 123 –205.
Petty, R. E., Cacioppo, J. T., & Kao, C. F. ( 1984 ). The e ﬃcient assessment of need for cognition. Journal of Personality
Assessment ,48(3), 306–307.
Rolstad, S., Adler, J., & Rydén, A. ( 2011 ). Response burden and questionnaire length: Is shorter better? A review and meta-
analysis. Value in Health ,14(8), 1101 –1108.
Staats, A. W., & Staats, C. K. ( 1958 ). Attitudes established by classical conditioning. The Journal of Abnormal and Social
Psychology ,57(1), 37 –40.
Sadowski, C. J. ( 1993 ). An examination of the short need for cognition scale. The Journal of Psychology ,127(4), 451 –454.
Short, C. E., James, E. L., & Plotniko ﬀ,R .C .( 2013 ). Theory-and evidence-based development and process evaluation of the
move more for life program: A tailored-print intervention designed to promote physical activity among post-treat-
ment breast cancer survivors. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,10(1), 124.
Short, C. E., James, E. L., Plotniko ﬀ, R. C., & Girgis, A. ( 2011 ). Eﬃ cacy of tailored-print interventions to promote physical
activity: A systematic review of randomised trials. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,
8(1), 113.
Short, C. E., Rebar, A. L., Plotniko ﬀ, R. C., & Vandelanotte, C. ( 2015 ). Designing engaging online behaviour change inter-
ventions: A proposed model of user engagement. European Health Psychologist ,17(1), 32 –38.
Short, C. E., James, E. L., Rebar, A. L., Duncan, M. J., Courneya, K. S., Plotniko ﬀ, R. C., . . . Vandelanotte, C. ( 2017 ). Designing
more engaging computer-tailored physical activity behaviour change interventions for breast cancer survivors:
lessons from the iMove More for Life study. Support Care Cancer ,25(11), 3569 –3585.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 451
Smit, E. S., Linn, A. J., & van Weert, J. C. ( 2015 ). Taking online computer-tailoring forward: The potential of tailoring the
message frame and delivery mode of online health behaviour change interventions. European Health Psychologist,
17(1), 25 –31.
Spittaels, H., De Bourdeaudhuij, I., Brug, J., & Vandelanotte, C. ( 2006 ). Eﬀectiveness of an online computer-tailored physical
activity intervention in a real-life setting. Health Education Research ,22(3), 385 –396.
Spittaels, H., De Bourdeaudhuij, I., & Vandelanotte, C. ( 2007 ). Evaluation of a website-delivered computer-tailored inter-
vention for increasing physical activity in the general population. Preventive Medicine ,44(3), 209 –217.
StataCorp, L. ( 2009 ).Stata version 11.0 . College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. ( 2004 ). Reﬂective and impulsive determinants of social behavior. Personality and Social Psychology
Review ,8(3), 220 –247.
Team, R. ( 2015 ).RStudio: Integrated development for R . Boston, MA: RStudio. http://www.rstudio.com .
Vandelanotte, C., Short, C., Plotniko ﬀ, R. C., Hooker, C., Canoy, D., Rebar, A., …Duncan, M. J. ( 2015 ). Tayloractive –examin-
ing the e ﬀectiveness of web-based personally-tailored videos to increase physical activity: A randomised controlled
trial protocol. BMC Public Health ,15(1), 1020.
Vidrine, J. I., Simmons, V. N., & Brandon, T. H. ( 2007 ). Construction of smoking-relevant risk perceptions Among college
students: The in ﬂuence of need for cognition and message content. Journal of Applied Social Psychology ,37(1), 91– 114.
Vigneau, F., & Lalande, F. ( 2006 ). Multidimensionnalité de l ’Échelle de besoin de cognition –Note sur l ’utilisation d ’items
négatifs dans un questionnaire de personnalité. Perspectives de psychologie di ﬀérentielle , 267 –272.
Waters, L., & Zakrajsek, T. ( 1990 ). Correlates of need for cognition total and subscale scores. Educational and Psychological
Measurement, 50(1), 213 –217.
Webb, T. L., & Sheeran, P. ( 2006 ). Does changing behavioral intentions engender behavior change? A meta-analysis of the
experimental evidence. Psychological Bulletin ,132(2), 249 –268.
Wegener, D. T., Clark, J. K., & Petty, R. E. ( 2006 ). Not all stereotyping is created equal: Di ﬀerential consequences of thought-
ful versus nonthoughtful stereotyping. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology ,90(1), 42.
Williams-Piehota, P., Pizarro, J., Navarro Silvera, S. A., Mowad, L., & Salovey, P. ( 2006 ). Need for cognition and message
complexity in motivating fruit and vegetable intake among callers to the cancer information service. Health
Communication ,19(1), 75– 84.
Williams-Piehota, P., Schneider, T. R., Pizarro, J., Mowad, L., & Salovey, P. ( 2003 ). Matching health messages to information-
processing styles: Need for cognition and mammography utilization. Health Communication ,15(4), 375 –392.
Wolfenden, L., Nathan, N., & Williams, C. M. ( 2015 ). Computer-tailored interventions to facilitate health behavioural
change. British Journal of Sports Medicine, 49(22), 1478 –1479.
Zhang, Y. ( 1996 ). Responses to humorous advertising: The moderating e ﬀect of need for cognition. Journal of Advertising ,
25(1), 15 –32.doi:10.1080/00913367.1996.10673493452 I. NIKOLOUDAKIS ET AL.
