Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology and Health
ISSN: 0887-0446 (Print) 1476-8321 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Regulation of behaviour in pursuit of health goals
Shema Orbell & Paschal Sheeran
To cite this article:  Shema Orbell & Paschal Sheeran (1998) Regulation of behaviour in pursuit
of health goals, Psychology and Health, 13:4, 753-758, DOI: 10.1080/08870449808407429
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870449808407429
Published online: 19 Dec 2007.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 238
View related articles 
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Psychology and Health, 1998, Vol. 13, pp. 753-758 
Reprints available directly from the Publisher 
Photocopying permitted by license only 8 1998 OPA (Overseas Publishers Association) N.V. 
Published by license under 
the Hanvd Academic Publishers imprint, 
part of The Gordon and Breach Publishing Group. 
Printed in India. 
REGULATION OF BEHAVIOUR IN PURSUIT OF 
HEALTH GOALS 
SHEMA ORBELL* and PASCHAL SHEERAN 
Department of Psychology, University of Shefleld, Western Bank, Shefield, UK 
(Received 3 April, 1997; in final form 24 July. 1997) 
Prediction of health related behaviours and the specification of cognitive processes which might guide develop 
ment of effective interventions may be promoted by the identification of processes which mediate between 
intentions and health behaviour. The present commentary addresses theorrtical developments concerning the 
role of cognitive and personality processes in volitional pursuit of health related goals and in the maintenance of 
behavioural change. 
KEY WORDS: Intention, self-regulation, volition. 
Interventions to promote public health can be targeted at individual, group and societal lev- 
els. The papers by Bagozzi and Edwards ( 1998), Fuhrmann and Kuhl(l998), and Gollwitzer 
and Oettingen (1998) each address the social-cognitive determinants of individual-level 
behaviour change. In contrast, Leventhal, Leventhal and Contrada (1998) address both 
the individual and group levels, conceptualising patients’ beliefs as the proximate deter- 
minants of responses to disease, derived from, and reinforced by, the person’s cdtural 
context. Bandura (1998) considers the implications of self-efficacy for interventions at all 
three levels. Health psychology has often neglected its potential to achieve change beyond 
the individual level and we welcome Bandura’s proposals for group- and societal-level 
interventions based upon collective self-efficacy. This construct may provide a valuable 
theoretical basis for ‘community development’, which is an expanding field within health 
promotion, and one which may have utility in confronting health variations due to social 
class, gender and ethnicity. 
Research and interventions in health psychology have traditionally been guided by 
three social cognitive accounts of health and social behaviour; the Health Belief Model 
(HBM, Janz and Becker, 1984), the Theory of Reasoned Action (TRA, Fishbein and 
Ajzen, 1975) and Protection-Motivation Theory (PMT, Rogers, 1983). Meta-analytic 
reviews have shown that while HBM variables have only modest predictive power 
(Harrison, Mullen and Green, 1992) the behavioural intention construct from the TRA 
and PMT typically accounts for 20-30% of the variance in behavioural performance 
(e.g., Sheppard, Hartwick and Warshaw, 1988; Hodgkins, Sheeran and Orbell, 1997). 
This suggests that there is usually a good deal of inconsistency between intentions and 
health behaviour. Unfortunately, correlational data obscures the source of this incon- 
sistency. Decomposition of the intention-behaviour relation into 4 cells (intend-act, 
intend-do not act, do not intend-act, and do not intend-do not act) has shown that the 
main source of inconsistency between intention and behaviour lies with intenders who do 
Corresponding author. E-mail: s.orbell@shefEeld.ac.uk. 
753 
154 S. ORBELL AND P. SHEERAN 
not act (“inclined abstainers”) rather than non-intenders who act (“disinclined actors”) 
(Orbell and Sheeran, in press). We view the intention-behaviour gap as one of the most 
pressing concerns for self-regulation theorists. Since most of the papers included in this 
Special Issue describe theoretical developments which directly address this issue, our aim 
in this commentary is to examine the advances made by the authors in understanding 
intention-behaviour consistency and to discuss the implications for intervention in health 
psychology. 
SPECIFICATION OF PROXIMAL DETERMINANTS OF GOAL SUCCESS 
Prochaska and DiClemente (1 992) maintain that understanding health-related behavioural 
change requires attention to individuals’ readiness for change and that interventions must 
be targeted according to the ‘readiness’ of particular individuals to be effective. They out- 
line a stage model which suggests that people pursue health goals according to a linear 
progression fiom precontemplation (no intention to change), contemplation (intention to 
change), action and maintenance of behaviour change. Bandura provides a convincing 
critique of this approach, arguing that stage models typically violate necessary assump- 
tions regarding qualitative transformations across discrete stages, an invariant sequence 
of change and nonreversibility. We would add, that the most convincing test of a stage 
model, namely, comparison of a stage-matched versus a stage non-matched intervention, 
has yet to be reported in the literature. More importantly, as Bandura points out, because 
stage models focus on ‘readiness’ rather than the factors predicting readiness, this 
approach would seem to describe, rather than explain, individuals’ failure to act upon 
their intentions. 
This contrasts with Bagozzi and Edwards’ (1998) Theory of Self-Regulation (TSR) 
which explicitly addresses variables hypothesised to mediate the relationship between 
intentions and behaviour. While the TSR appears to borrow some of the vocabulary of 
stage models (e.g., “preactional phase and action initiation”), the primary concern of this 
model is not assigning individuals to discrete stages but rather identifjmg psychological 
and behavioural processes which most effectively translate goal intentions into goal out- 
comes. In this regard, we see the concepts of mental and physical trying as useful 
advances in specifying the proximal determinants of goal success. However, we would 
note that the variance explained in mental and physical trying was relatively modest in 
Bagozzi and Edwards’ study (R2=.10) which might suggest that that the Volitional 
Components Inventory which demonstrated significant relationships with perceived effort 
in Fuhrmann and Kuhl(l998) might usefully augment the model. 
Gollwitzer’s (1990) and Heckhausen’s (1991) Model of Action Phases (MAP) also pro- 
vides a theoretical advance on stage models. The MAP makes a conceptual distinction 
between the desire for behaviour change culminating in goal setting (the motivational 
phase) which parallels the TRA’s view of intention formation, and the volitional phase, 
which is characterised by the steps taken by individuals to ensure goal achievement. 
Importantly, the model suggests that movement from the motivational to the volitional 
phase is characterised, first, by the intention or decision to pursue a given goal, and sec- 
ond, by the formation of plans concerning where, when and how to act. Only when plans 
specifying the action and the location and timing of its enactment (“implementation inten- 
tions”) are formed, can the individual move fiom the motivational to the volitional phase 
of behaviour change. Since the MAP specifies the cognitive prerequisites of progress 
SELF-REGULATION OF THE INTENTION-BEHAVIOUR RELATION 755 
towards goal achievement, it provides a basis for psychological interventions which 
directly address the question of how to promote movement from contemplation to action. 
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES IN GOAL PURSUIT AND GOAL ACHIEVEMENT 
Fuhrmann and Kuhl(l998) provide a unique contribution to the problem of goal pursuit 
by suggesting that volitional success may be moderated by a dispositional variable which 
they call Action-State Orientation. State-oriented individuals are characterised by a ten- 
dency to hesitate before deciding to act and by a cognitive focus on goals rather than 
actions which may impair volitional success. Action-oriented individuals, on the other 
hand, demonstrate rapid decision making rather than hesitation, and focus on actions 
rather than goals leading to improved volitional success. One implication of their distinc- 
tion is that individuals who are action oriented are more likely to translate their intentions 
into action (Kuhl and Beclunann, 1985). Although some previous research has not sup- 
ported this contention (e.g. Kendzierski, 1990), Fhann and Kuhl’s paper suggests a 
resolution, namely, that volitional success may be the result of a complex interaction 
between type of goal (self-set versus other-set), situational constraints which make the 
goal easy or difficult to pursue, and personality disposition. They present evidence indi- 
cating that volitional success in goal pursuit was superior when the goal was self-set, as 
opposed to being recommended by another person. Furthermore, this effect was even 
more powerful for action-oriented individuals and when the goal itself was difficult to 
pursue. An important implication for interventions in health psychology is that encourag- 
ing participants to set their own goals for health-related behavioural change is likely to 
lead to higher success rates, particularly where the task of behavioural self-change is per- 
ceived as difficult or challenging and the individual disposition is action-oriented. The 
development of these findings in the context of interventions to promote health will 
require that health educators pay attention not only to the manner in which behavioural or 
health state goals are set (by the participant, rather than by the educator), but to the nature 
of the goal itself. The flexible presentation of the behavioural task as either challenging 
or easy according to the individuals’ personal disposition is likely to enhance intervention 
effectiveness depending on his or her personality. 
Bagozzi and Edwards (1 998) present a novel methodology for eliciting goal structures 
which may simultaneously address problems with expectancy-value theory and may also 
have utility in understanding intention-behaviour relations. Sutton (1996) has pointed out 
that researchers employing the TR4 frequently find that the beliefs about the conse- 
quences of a behaviour (attitude) which underlay a behavioural intention may be so highly 
intercorrelated that it becomes difficult to determine which beliefs are most important and 
should therefore be the focus of interventions. Bagozzi and Edwards’ idiographic 
approach to hierarchical goal structures may prove valuable in addressing this problem. 
Regarding intention-behaviour relations, we believe that this approach could be used to 
address many interesting questions. For example, the reasons given for non-performance 
of a health behaviour usually relate to contextual and situational factors which under- 
mined positive intentions (e.g., “I was drunk” or “I did not expect to have sexual inter- 
course” as reasons for condom non-use, see Duncan et al., 1997). It might be valuable to 
contrast the reasons for intending to perform a behaviour versus the reasons for not actu- 
ally performing the behaviour using this method in order to determine factors distin- 
guishing “inclined actors” and “inclined abstainers”. Relatedly, this method could be used 
156 S. OWELL AND P. SHEERAN 
to determine whether the intentions of people who are extrinsically motivated (e.g., peo- 
ple who view “social acceptance” as a ‘prominant’ reason for weight loss) are more likely 
to be enacted than the intentions of people who are intrinsically motivated. Eliciting hier- 
archical goal structures in the manner described by Bagozzi and Edwards might also 
serve as a motivational intervention which health educators could employ in order to 
challenge and/or reinforce people’s reasons for pursuing particular health goals. 
BEHAVIOURAL INITIATION VERSUS BEHAVIOURAL 
MAMTENANCE AND THE CONCEPT OF ‘HABIT’ 
Many health-related behavioural goals can be described as health state goals or complex 
behavioural goals (Orbell et al., 1997). Health state goals refer to goals where the out- 
come is a ‘state’ such as ‘being fit’, or ‘being slimmer’ which could be achieved by a vari- 
ety of behaviours (e.g., dieting, exercise). Complex behavioural goals are goals which 
require the specification of a series of subgoals in order to be pursued effectively (e.g., 
acquiring and carrying condoms and negotiating with a sexual partner could be considered 
sub-goals vis the goal of condom use). As Bagozzi and Edwards demonstrated, obtaining 
good correlations between goal intentions and goal success in the context of health state 
goals is facilitated by the specification of proximal behavioural acts. This approach may 
have particular utility in considering the behavioural strategies required to pursue complex 
health state goals such as those encountered by people dealing with chronic diseases such 
as diabetes or asthma. However, it’s also important to note that in order to achieve a com- 
plex goal or a health state goal, behavioural acts in the service of the goal need to be sw 
tained over a period of time. For example, in the context of the goal of losing weight, the 
person must not only initiate behavioural change by means of, e.g., an exercise pro- 
gramme, the person must also maintain regular exercise. One way of characterising this 
issue is to refer to the problem of ‘creating habits’. Two of the papers in this special issue 
speak to this difficulty. Fuhnnann and Kuhl observed the phenomenon that some individu- 
als may ‘appear’ highly motivated to pursue behavioural change while they are taking part 
in an intervention (McCaul, Glasgow and O’Neill, 1992) but, do not, in fact, maintain this 
ostensive motivation, nor translate it into volitional success, over the longer-term. 
Furhmann and Kuhl were also able to specify the conditions under which this ‘tailing off 
effect is most likely. Their data showed that action-oriented individuals are highly attentive 
to others recommendations when the goal in question is presented as ‘easy’ or likely to 
produce quick rewards, but that they do not in fact increase their commitment to the rec- 
ommended course of action. hterventions which aim to promote participants’ longer-term 
commitment to performing a behaviour would therefore need to emphasise the challenging 
nature of self-set goals. Gollwitzer’s (1993, Gollwitzer and Oettingen, 1998) concept of 
implementation intentions also provides a perspective on the problem of creating habits. 
This approach addresses the cognitive mechanisms which facilitate behavioural enactment 
rather than the nature of goals or individual difference variables. The concept of imple- 
mentation intentions has particular value for health psychology, since it provides a tech- 
nique which can be used to develop volitional interventions for health state and complex 
goals. A significant hindrance to volitional success is difficulty with getting started, or, as 
Bargh (1990) terms it, the problem of ‘missed opportunities’. For example, the goal inten- 
tion of ‘getting tit’ might be executed in a variety of different ways, and in a variety of dif- 
ferent contexts. By forming an implementation intention such as ‘I will join the fitness 
SELF-REGULATION OF THE INTENTION-BEHAVIOUR RELATION 757 
club on Friday on my way home from work’, difficulties surrounding the initiation of 
action may be overcome. More importantly in the present context, the formation of an 
implementation intention may not only increase the likelihood of action and the speed 
with which intentions are enacted, an implementation intention may also ensure that the 
focal behaviour is initiated on every occasion that the appropriate context for action is 
encountered. Gollwitzer provides evidence that linking an intention and the context of its 
behavioural performance in memory is responsible for the effectiveness of implementation 
intentions. This effect has led us to suggest that mentally rehearsing what one will do, and 
when and where one will do it, mimics the effects of behavioural rehearsal which are 
known to lead to the development of habits (Orbell et al., 1997). 
CONCLUSION 
We have highlighted three key theoretical issues which have implications for improved 
prediction of health-related behaviour and the development of effective interventions. 
The first concerned the identification of processes which mediate between intentions and 
health behaviour. While existing social cognitive models deal only with the development 
of motivation to pursue a goal, Gollwitzer and Oettingen’s paper outlined a two phase 
model which specifies not only the cognitive processes which characterise the volitional 
phase but also the acts required of the individual to move from one phase to the next. 
Secondly, we have highlighted the implications of Kuhl’s work on personality disposi- 
tions in moderating the effective translation of intentions into action. This work illustrates 
the importance of matching intervention content to dispositional style. Third, we have 
considered the problem of maintenance of behavioural change. Bagoui and Edwards 
suggestion that complex goals need to be broken down into behavioural subgoals pro- 
vides a useful starting point for this work, while Gollwitzer’s work on implementation 
intentions may prove an invaluable technique for achieving sustained behavioural 
change. 
References 
Bandura, A. (1998) Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive theory. Psychology and Health, 
13,623-649. 
Bagoui, R.P. and Edwards, E.A. (1998) Goal setting and goal pursuit in the regulation of body weight. 
Psychology and Health, 13,59362 I. 
Bargh, J.A. (1990) Auto-motives: Preconscious determinants of social interaction. In E.T. Higgins and 
R.M. Sorrentino (Eds.) Handbook of Motivation and Cognition: Foundations of Social Behaviour 
(pp. 93-130) New York: Guilford Press. 
Duncan, B., Sheeran, P., Spencer, C.P. and Hicks, D. (1997) Gender differences in explanations for condom 
non-use. Special Group in Health Psychology Annual Conference, Southampton, July 1997. 
Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. (1975) Beliel; Attitude, Infention and Behnviour. New York: Wiley. 
Fuhrmann, A. and Kuhl, J. (1998) Maintaining a healthy diet: Effects of personality and self-reward versus 
self-punishment on commitment to and enactment of self-chosen and assigned goals. PsychologV and Healfh, 
13,65 1-686. 
Gollwitzer, P.M. and Oettingen, G. (1998) The emergence and implementation of health goals. Psychology and 
Health, 13,687-715. 
Gollwitzer, P.M. (1990) Action phases and mind-sets. In E.T. Higgins and R.M. Sorrentino (Eds.) Handbook of 
Motivation and Cognition: Foundations of Social Behaviour (pp. 53-92). New York: Guildford Press. 
Harrison, J.A., Mullen, P.D. and Green, L.W. (1992) A meta-analysis of studies of the health belief model with 
adults. Health Education Research, 7, 107-16. 
Heckhausen, H. (I 991) Motivation and Action (pp. 163-188) Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
758 S. ORBELL AND P. SHEERAN 
Hodgkins, S., Sheem, P. and Orbell, S. (1997) Prediction and intervention in health related behaviour 
Janz, N. and Becker, M.H. (1984) The health belief model: a decade later. Health Education Quarterly, 11, 
Kendzierski, D. (1990) Decision making versus decision implementation: an action control approach to exercise 
Kuhl, J. and Beclanana, J. (1985) Action Conml. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. 
Leventhal, H., Leventhal, E.A. and Contrada, R.J. (1998) Self-regulation, health and behaviour A perceptual- 
cognitive approach. Psychology and Health, 13,717-733. 
McCaul, KD., Glasgow, R.E. and O’Neill, H.K. (1992) The problem of creating habits: Establishing 
health-protective dental behaviors. Heulrh Psychology. 11, 101-1 10. 
Orbell, S., Hodg)uns, S. and Shceran, P. (1997) Implementation intentions and the theory of planned behaviour. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23,953-962, 
Orbell, S. and She- P. (in press) Inclined abstainers: A problem for predicting health related behaviour. 
British Journal of Social Psychology. 
Prochaska, J.O. and DiClemente. C.C. (1992) Stages of change in the modification of problem behaviours. In 
M. Hersen, R.M. Eisler and P.M. Miller (Eds.) Pmgms in behaviour modification (Vol. 28, pp. 184-218) 
Tem Haute, IN: Sycamore. 
Rogers, R.W. (1983) Cognitive and physiological processes in fear appeals and attitude change: a revised theory 
of protectionmotivation. In J.T. Cacioppo and R.E. Petty (Eds.) Social Psychophysiology: A Source Book. 
New Yo& Guilford Press, 153-76. 
Sheppard, B.H.. Hartwick, J. and Warshaw, P.R. (1988) The theory of reasoned action: a meta-analysis of past 
research with recommendations for modifications and future research. Journul of Consumer Research, 15, A meta-analysis of protection-motivation theory. Paper under review. 
1-47. 
adoption and adherence. Jomal of AppIied Social Psycholog, 20,27-45. 
325-39. 
