RESEARCH Open Access
Challenges of nurse delivery of psychological
interventions for long-term conditions in primarycare: a qualitative exploration of the case ofchronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalitis
Sarah Peters1*, Alison Wearden1, Richard Morriss2, Christopher F Dowrick3, Karina Lovell4, Joanna Brooks5,
Greg Cahill3and Carolyn Chew-Graham6
Abstract
Background: The evidence base for a range of psychosocial and behavioural interventions in managing and
supporting patients with long-term conditions (LTCs) is now well-established. With increasing numbers of such
patients being managed in primary care, and a shortage of specialists in psychology and behavioural managementto deliver interventions, therapeutic interventions are increasingly being delivered by general nurses with limitedtraining in psychological interventions. It is unknown what issues this raises for the nurses or their patients. Thepurpose of the study was to examine the challenges faced by non-specialist nurses when delivering psychological
interventions for an LTC (chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis [CFS/ME]) within a primary care
setting.
Methods: A qualitative study nested within a randomised controlled trial [ISRCTN 74156610] explored the
experiences and acceptability of two different psychological interventions (pragmatic rehabilitation and supportive
listening) from the perspectives of nurses, their supervisors, and patients. Semi structured in-depth interviews were
conducted with three nurse therapists, three supervisors, and 46 patients. An iterative approach was used to
develop conceptual categories from the dataset.
Results: Analyses identified four sets of challenges that were common to both interventions: (i) being a novice
therapist, (ii) engaging patients in the therapeutic model, (iii) dealing with emotions, and (iv) the complexity of
primary care. Each challenge had the potential to cause tension between therapist and patient. A number ofstrategies were developed by participants to manage the tensions.
Conclusions: Tensions existed for nurses when attempting to deliver psychological interventions for patients with
CFS/ME in this primary care trial. Such tensions should be addressed before implementing psychological
interventions within routine clinical practice. Similar tensions may be found for other LTCs. Our findings haveimplications for developing therapeutic alliances and highlight the need for regular supervision.
Background
The management of long-term conditions (LTCs) has
changed considerably over the past decade, resulting insuch health problems being principally managed withinprimary care by general practitioners (GPs) and practicenurses (PNs), with support by specialist services whennecessary and available [1]. Rewarding more effective
and efficient ways of managing LTCs is a central feature
of the current United Kingdom (UK) General Practicecontract [2].
A growing evidence base now exists for the effective-
ness of a range of psychologi cal interventions that are
increasingly important in the management of LTCsincluding chronic obstructive pulmonary disease [3],rheumatoid arthritis pain [ 4], and chronic pain [5,6],
* Correspondence: Sarah.peters@manchester.ac.uk
1School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articlePeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132
Implementation
Science
© 2011 Peters et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
though this evidence base largely comes from secondary
care [7]. Introducing psychol ogical interventions devel-
oped and established in secondary care to primary carecan be problematic; a key iss ue is the current shortage
of specialists in psychological and behavioural therapieswith the necessary training and availability to take refer-
rals from primary care practitioners [8]. Without an
adequate broadening of the workforce, GPs have seen awidening in the scope of their role [9]. Not only haveprimary care physicians increasingly needed to developpsychological intervention skills to manage LTCs andmental health problems, but nurse practitioners are alsoincreasingly becoming involved in delivering psychologi-cal interventions to support these patients [10,11].
Primary care nurse-led clinics have proven effective in
a providing care for a range of LTCs, including chronicpain [12], medically unexplained symptoms [13], irrita-ble bowel syndrome [14], and diabetes [15]. This islikely to be an increasingly common model for care.Consequently, such therape utic interventions will be
more frequently delivered by generalist primary carenurses with limited training in psychology or mental
health.
Both GPs and nurses are generally positive about the
increased role of nurse practitioners in chronic disease
management, yet it remains unclear how best to imple-ment this change [16]. In particular, it remains unknownwhat issues confront nurses or their patients. The focusof the present study is to explore changing roles relatedto a particular LTC for which a growing evidence base
of psychological interventions exists: chronic fatigue
syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME).
CFS/ME is a symptomatically defined illness with a
primary symptom of severe fatigue, unrelieved by rest,and unexplained by medical or psychiatric causes. Fati-gue must be present for at least six months and asso-ciated with substantial functional impairment [17].Prevalence estimates are between 0.2% and 0.4% in the
UK [18], with substantial economic consequences for
services, patients, and their families [19]. By definition,this is an LTC with an average duration between threeand nine years and only a minority of patients achievingpremorbid levels of functioni ng [20]. A substantial evi-
dence base now exists as to the most effective ways ofmanaging the condition, with cognitive behavioural ther-apy (CBT) and graded exercise therapy (GET) having
the most robust evidence base [21,22]. In addition, there
is evidence that primary care-based counselling invol-ving supportive listening can be as effective as CBT forchronic fatigue [23], though not necessarily for CFS/ME.A counselling approach is relatively more availablewithin primary care [24].
The National Institute fo r Health and Clinical Excel-
lence (NICE) recommends that like other LTCs, CFS/ME should be managed in primary care, with referral tospecialist services only when necessary [25], and prefer-ably locally [18]. However, a s for other LTCs, the cur-
rent shortfall in trained therapists, both withinsecondary care and primary care, to provide these evi-dence-based psychological interventions means that
NICE recommendations remain unachieved and most
CFS/ME patients do not have access to such treatmentor must wait, in some cases for several years [20]. Con-sequently, attention has turned to the possibilities ofdelivering these interventions through existing non-spe-cialist primary care health professionals [26]. Specifically,it has been identified that PNs are well placed to pro-vide this role [13]. A recent study revealed that nurses
themselves would welcome this role, although only if
adequately trained and supported [27]. Translating effec-tive treatments from rigorous trial settings to clinicalpractice can result in more modest effects [28], andsimilar decrements in effects are found when movingfrom secondary care to primary care [7]. However, animportant first step in maximising the effectivenessembedding a treatment such as nurse-delivered psycho-
logical intervention for LTCs into routine clinical prac-
tice is to systematically identify potential barriers andsolutions necessary to support its introduction [29].
A recent primary care trial that we conducted com-
paring two nurse-delivered treatments for CFS/ME( F I N Et r i a l )[ 3 0 ]p r o v i d e da n opportunity to examine
implementation challenges for nurses and patients andto identify strategies to overcome these challenges.
Thus, the aim of this study was to identify potential bar-
riers and solutions that could arise if this approach wasimplemented within routine practice.
Methods
Our study sample was drawn from patients participatingin a randomised controlled trial of two nurse-deliveredpsychological interventions for CFS/ME in primary care
(FINE trial) [30]. Patients (n = 296) for the trial, having
been diagnosed with CFS/ME, were referred by their GPand were randomised to receive nurse-delivered suppor-tive listening (SL), pragmatic rehabilitation (PR), ortreatment as usual. The focus of the trial was to evaluatethe effectiveness of each intervention compared with GPtreatment as usual [3]. Interviews for this qualitativestudy were conducted with the three trial nurses, three
supervisors, and a sample of patients. This qualitative
study was reviewed and approved by the Eastern Multi-centre Research Ethics Committee (MREC) (reference03/5/62).
Three experienced primary care nurses without spe-
cialist training in psycholog ical therapies, and with no
prior experience with CFS/ME, were trained to delivertwo different evidence-based psychological interventions:Peters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 2 of 13
PR and SL. PR involves presenting patients with an
explanation of their symptoms based on physiologicalderegulation [31] and encompasses principles of CBTand GET. SL provides emotional support and validationof patients ’experiences and is based on a nondirective
person-centred counselling approach (See Table 1 for
content and structure of each therapy). Each interven-
tion was delivered over 18 weeks with five face-to-facehome visits interspersed with five telephone sessions.Sessions lasted between 30 and 90 minutes. A schedulewas provided to nurses as a guide to the delivery of PR,although it was recognised that for some patients ther-apy would proceed more quickly or more slowly ortopics might be covered in a different order. Because SL
is a patient-led therapy, the patient set the agenda at
each session and no schedule of content was provided.Each intervention was supported by a patient manual.
All nurses were experienced registered adult-speciality
primary care nurses who had no specialist training inmental health, psychology, or CFS/ME. The nurses werefemale. Nurses were trained to deliver both interven-tions, in parallel, over a six -month period. Training in
each therapy was provided by therapists highly experi-enced in the particular therapy. Each therapy was alsosupported by a training manual. For each therapy,nurses received 16 half-days of training, which involvedintroduction to the techniques and concepts of thetherapeutic approach, skills training using role-play anddiscussions, ‘shadowing ’trainers in hospital CFS service,
and practice with volunteer patients. Sessions withpatients were audiotaped (with patients ’consent), and
the tapes, together with material generated by thepatients and the nurses, were assessed to evaluate
nurses ’practice in accordance with predefined criteria
relating to knowledge, skills, and attitude [32]. Each
nurse was interviewed individually on two occasions: fol-lowing training and again following 2.5 years of treat-ment delivery. Interviews on the first occasion centredon their background, experience of the training, andexpectations of delivering therapy. The second inter-views focused on experien ces of treating people with
CFS/ME, delivering the two therapies, and experienceswith supervision.
Throughout the trial, the nurses received regular
supervision from experienced clinicians with expertise ineither PR (n = 2) or SL (n = 1) who had been involvedin developing the interventions and protocols and train-ing the nurses. Their professional backgrounds werepsychiatry, clinical psychology, and counselling. All
supervisors were male. Supervisors met with the thera-
pists frequently (approximately every two weeks for eachtherapy type), individuall y or in groups, to discuss and
provide advice on individual cases and to ensure therapywas adhering to the relevant protocol. For this study,
Table 1 Structure and content of therapies
Pragmatic rehabilitation Supportive listening
Overview
oftreatmentProvides a physiological dysregulation model of CFS/ME, supported by areferenced manual, which underpins the rationale for a programme ofgraded return to activity, designed collaboratively by patient and therapist.The rehabilitation programme encourages patients to regularise their sleeppatterns and includes relaxation exercises to address the somatic symptoms
of anxiety and the concentration and memory problems that many patients
experience.A form of nondirective counselling, based on person-centred counselling techniques. The therapist aims toprovide an empathic and validating environment inwhich the patient can discuss his or her concerns andwork towards resolution of whichever problems the
patient wishes to prioritise.
Structure
oftreatmentSession 1: 90-minute home visit. One-hour home visits on weeks 2, 4, 10,and 18. Thirty-minute telephone calls on weeks 3, 6, 8, 12, and 15.Session 1: 90-minute home visit. One-hour home visitson weeks 2, 4, 10, and 18. Thirty-minute telephonecalls on weeks 3, 6, 8, 12, and 15.
Content oftreatmentSession 1: Patients are presented with a detailed explanation of theirsymptoms, supported by a referenced manual, with diary pages, reinforcingthe model and outlining a rehabilitative programme.Session 2: The manual is reviewed, patient priorities are determined, andgoals for rehabilitation are set collaboratively by the patient and therapist.
Care is taken to set goals at a level easily manageable by the patient.
Sessions 3-10: At subsequent sessions, progress is reviewed, and therehabilitative programme adjusted if necessary.Sessions 5-10: Relapse prevention is discussed in the fifth to tenth sessions.In all sessions, the model of CFS/ME contained in the manual is reinforced.Session 1: The basis of the therapeutic approach isexplained and a short booklet with diary pages isgiven to patients. Issues for discussion in subsequentsessions are elicited, and the therapists use standardcounselling techniques of active listening, reflection,
and summarizing to ensure that patients feel
understood.Sessions 2-10: The therapist summarises the previoussession ’s work and invites the patient to set the
agenda for that session ’s discussion. The therapists do
not provide any explanation for patients ’symptoms.
Throughout, the content of sessions is determined by
patients; therapists avoid giving advice or leading
patients and concentrate on providing an empathic,validating environment in which patients can discusstheir concerns, are encouraged to explore theirdifficulties, take responsibility for decisions, and identifyand use their own resources to manage their health.
CFS/ME = chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis.Peters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 3 of 13
interviews were conducted with each of the three super-
visors towards the end of the trial.
Patients for the trial were recruited from 44 primary
care trusts in the northwest of England. Primary carepractices were contacted and GPs were invited to referregistered patients with CFS/ME to the trial. Patients
were eligible if they were aged 18 years or over, fulfilled
the Oxford inclusion criteria for CFS [33], scored 70%or less on the 36 item Short Form Health Survey (SF-36) physical functioning scale, and scored 4 or more onthe 11-item Chalder fatigue scale [34]. Following con-sent, eligible patients were randomised to one of threearms: treatment as usual, SL, or PR. Further details ofthe trial recruitment procedures are provided elsewhere
[30].
Sampling for patients for this qualitative study was
purposive and sought to achieve maximum variation in
relation to the following: age, gender, deprivationindices, length of time since diagnosis, treatment condi-tion (PR, SL), physical functi oning post treatment [35],
and level of engagement with therapist [36]. In addition,seven patients who were referred to the trial but
declined to participate and six patients who withdrew
from the intervention prior to completion were inter-viewed. Of those who withdrew from the trial, two hadnot attended any sessions and two attended one session;the final two had attended three and five sessions,respectively. In total, 47 patients were invited to beinterviewed; 46 (98%) agreed to take part. Patient inter-views were conducted in participants’ homes. The final
patient sample comprised 33 women (72%); mean agewas 46.11 years (range 20-73). Length of time sincediagnosis ranged from 1 month to 23 years (mean = 71/2 years).
For each set of interviews, a topic guide provided a
flexible framework for questioning and explored a num-ber of areas including: understanding of CFS and itsmanagement and nurse-patient relationship and encoun-
ters. Patient interviews also explored views of the inter-
vention, whilst supervisor and nurse interviews alsoexplored experiences of delivering the intervention,i s s u e st h a ta r o s ed u r i n gs u p e r v i s i o n ,a n dt h er o l ea n dfunction of supervision. The interviewers combinedopen questions to elicit free responses, with focusedquestions for probing and prompting. All interviewswere digitally audiotaped and transcribed verbatim.
Nurse interviews lasted between 138 and 180 minutes
(mean duration = 159 minutes). Supervisor interviewslasted between 53 and 90 minutes (mean duration = 63minutes), and participant interviews lasted between 30and 90 minutes (mean duration = 47 minutes). Inter-views with non-participating and withdrawn patientslasted between 20 and 61 minutes (mean duration = 42minutes).Analysis proceeded in parallel with the interviews and
was inductive ( i.e., data driven and theory informing,
rather than deductive and theory driven), taking aninterpretative stance, whereby we sought to explore par-ticipants ’understanding of their experience through
their reports of events [37]. Transcripts were read and
discussed by researchers fr om different professional
backgrounds (primary care [n = 2]; psychology [n = 3];
and psychiatry, sociology, and nursing [n = 1 each]),increasing the trustworthiness of the analysis [38]. Cod-ing was iterative and was informed by the accumulatingdata and continuing thematic analysis. Thematic cate-gories were identified in initial interviews that were thentested or explored in subsequent interviews where dis-
confirmatory evidence was sought [39]. This was not
possible with the other sample categories due to thesmall number of nurse-therapists and supervisors (n = 3each). Interviewing the nurses on a second occasionenabled exploration of emerging themes for patients andfrom initial nurse interviews. Themes were onlyincluded in the final analysis if they were common toboth therapies, and hence, had the potential to general-
ise beyond the specific treatment approach. Interpreta-
tion and coding of data were undertaken by four of theauthors individually, and the themes were agreed onthrough discussion. Further development of the analysisinvolved all authors through consensus meetings,whereby interim analysis was presented (along with sup-porting data) for interrogation by the wider team. Ideasemerging from these discuss ions could then be subse-
quently tested within further interviews and analysis.
In reporting the final analy sis, the data are presented
to illustrate the range and commonality of meaning ofeach category of analysis from the perspectives ofpatients, nurse therapists, and supervisors.
Results
Four sets of challenges emerged that led to, or had
potential to lead to, tension between patients and thera-
pists and were common to both interventions. These areconsidered in turn: (i) being a novice therapist, (ii) enga-ging patients in the therapeutic model, (iii) dealing withemotions, and, (iv) the complexity of primary care. Theanalysis and interpretation of the data are extended todemonstrate the strategies nurses and patients employedto manage these tensions (see Figure 1 for summary of
analysis).
(i) Being a novice therapist
Whilst the nurse therapists were highly experienced as
nurses (having each been registered for over 20 years asa nurse and worked at least 15 years in primary care),the role of therapist was novel. Training for the twotherapy interventions was substantial (approximately sixPeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 4 of 13
months full-time) and was found to be demanding, yet
this was contrasted with the ir extensive experience in
their nursing role.
’A l t h o u g ht h e yh a dt h et r a i n i n go fc o u r s eb u ti t
didn’ t compare to the lifetime ’s experience they have
had of working in nursing. ’(Supervisor)
Working as a therapist and delivering therapy was
described as very different to their experiences of deli-vering nursing care. Nurses were aware they had tobehave differently, and this took additional effort on
their part.
’[As] an u r s e . . . Iw o u l dh a v ej u s tt u r n e du p ,s a i d
“right get on the bike. I will talk you through it ”and
that is something that I have had to restrain myself
with...I really had to teach myself to step back. ’
(Nurse)
Supervisors saw that, particularly during the first year
of delivering therapy, they were required to help nursesdevelop into their new identity, relating to patients in adifferent way.
’They felt they were nurses and they felt, not frauds
exactly working as counsellors, but you know not athome in that field really. I think part of my role wasa kind of normative role helping them to feel theirway into the persona really of being a counsellor...rather than just dealing with the nitty gritty of thepatients. ’(Supervisor)
Despite their newly found knowledge and skills in
these two specific therapies, not having a background aspsychological or behavioura l therapists meant that the
nurses had a relatively limited range of therapeutic skillsto draw upon, particularly for more challenging or com-plex cases.
’They don ’t know the kind of therapeutic tricks which
you have, which you pick up from being a therapist. ’
(Supervisor)1. Being a novice therapist 
 
• Additional training and new knowledge required 
• Different ways of interacting with patients and acquisition of a 
new professional identity (‘therapist’ versus ‘nurse’)  
• Working with unfamiliar skills 
• Having limited range of new skills to draw upon 
• Feeling (and being perceived by patient as) inexpert in new 
role 
• Need to establish boundaries of new role and skill set 
 
2. Engaging patients in the therapeutic model 
 • Mismatch between patient ‘s treatment and illness beliefs  
• Rational for psychological intervention not recognised 
3. Dealing with emotions • Fear of failure of therapy • Wider consequences of the intervention for patient • Patient disclosure  
• Managing patient’s resistance to treatment  
• Working with patient’s emotions  
 
4. Complexity of primary care 
• Managing co-morbidity (physical and psychiatric) 
• Visibility of patient’s social circumstances and it’s impact  
• Working in homes can bring chaotic environment, lack of privacy, personal insecurity, interference from family members Strategies to manage 
challenges 
 
•Withdraw from therapy 
• Invest in building 
alliance with patient • Be flexible 
• Peer support 
• Supervision and ongoing training 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 Challenges of nurse delivery of psychological interventions and strategies developed by nurses and patients .Peters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 5 of 13
Inevitably, there were aspects of their new role they
felt more comfortable and familiar with.
’We selected them for being general nurses, not men-
tal-health trained...they are less comfortable with this
[patients ’anxieties] than with the physical recondi-
tioning or even mental reconditioning. ’(Supervisor)
T h er o l eo fn o v i c et h e r a p i s tw a sf r e q u e n t l yc o n -
trasted with the role of the expert patient. Manypatient participants had had CFS/ME for many yearsa n dw e r eh i g h l yi n f o r m e da b o u tt h ei l l n e s sa n dm a n -agement options.
’With having ME for nearly 10 years I have read a
lot about it and you know I had talked to the doctorabout it. ’(Patient, Supportive Listening group)
Patients were also very familiar with their symptoms
and had identified patterns of triggers and ways ofmanaging their condition. This expertise enabled themto feel able to disagree with and challenge the nurse
therapist.
’“Id o n ’tw a n tt of a l lo u tw i t hy o u , ”she said... There
was nought wrong with her [therapist], we just didn ’t
agree on what she said. ’(Patient, Supportive Listen-
ing group, withdrew from therapy)
’She[nurse-therapist] was on about sleep. I have to
get up early in the morning and I said, “Well when
you have only had a couple of hours sleep, you can ’t
can you, ”we were arguing about that... I will go to
bed, it will take me about three hours to get to sleep,and I will have an hour, and I will waken up, and itwill take me another three hours, to get off again.“Well you should get up like at 9 o ’clock every morn-
ing, and then you will be more tired, you know, andyou would sleep better when you went to bed ”. I said,
“No it doesn ’tw o r kl i k et h a t ”,Is a i d “Ih a v et r i e d
that before ”. So we were falling out about that. ’
(Patient, Pragmatic Rehabilitation group, withdrewfrom therapy)
Having to work with patients who often were already
highly informed about their LTC was challenging whenhaving to work in a new way, and nurses felt they were
under a high degree of scrutiny by patients.
’They are testing you all the time. ’(Nurse)
This led nurses to feel their expertise as therapists was
not automatically establis hed and, furthermore, was
sometimes brought into question.’She happened to be on the SL arm, you know, of the
trial and very sort of insulting to me really .. [she said
to me] “Are you actually trained? ”[I thought] “No I
have just come off Tesco ’s cash till! ”And really,
really she would try and goad me... “Are you sure
you have been trained? ”and “What
exactly have you
read up on? ”and, you know, things like this. ’(Nurse)
Consequently, nurses had to learn the limitations and
boundaries of their new role, and supervision was vital
to support them in this.
’I think one of the skills that they have developed andthat we have talked about is the skill of knowing
when not to open something up with a patient,
because you know you haven ’t got the resources, the
scope to deal with it. ’(Supervisor)
(ii) Engaging patients in the therapeutic model
A critical component of successfully engaging a patientin a treatment is to ensure they understand and accept
the rationale for the treatme nt [40] Understanding and
acceptance were not synonymous in our sample, as the
following two quotations demonstrate:
’She explained all about...the physiology of it...first
time that I understood why my energy was so low;made a lot of sense. ’(Patient)
’It[the PR intervention] insisted that physiologically
there was nothing wrong. There was nothing wrongwith my glands, there was nothing wrong, that it wasjust deconditioned muscles. And I didn ’t believe
that...I can ’t get well with treatment you don ’t believe
in.’(Patient, declined to participate in the trial)
As with all long-term physical conditions, some indivi-
duals do not necessarily recognise the rationale for psy-
chological intervention. This is particularly true for
CFS/ME, where there are a wide range of illness beliefsabout the etiology and nature of CFS/ME [41]. Conse-quently, it was expected by the nurses that the therapywould pose a challenge for some patients and hadpotential to create some conflict and this indeed wasreported by the nurses.
’You might have a little bit of a tussle for the first
couple of weeks while they are getting their headaround the concept. ’(Nurse)
However, an unresolved mismatch between patient ’s
illness and treatment beliefs was a key source of tension.Evidence for this was found for both PR and SLPeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 6 of 13
treatments.
’If all that was standing between me and recovery
was the reconditioning I could work it out and do it,
b u tw h a tIh a v eg o ti sn o tj u s tar e c o n d i t i o n i n gp r o -blem. I have got something where there is damage
and a complete lack of strength actually getting into
the muscles and you can ’tw o r kw i t hw h a ty o u
haven ’t got in terms of energy .’(Patient, Pragmatic
Rehabilitation group)’I mostly believe it was more physical than anything
else, and I didn ’t see how talking could truthfully,
you know, if it was physical, do anything. ’(Patient
Supportive Listening group)
At times, this lack of agreement over the nature of the
condition and lack of acceptance as to the rationalebehind the treatment led to conflict.
’I kept arguing with her all the time because I didn ’t
agree with what she said. ’(Patient Pragmatic Rehabi-
litation group, withdrew from therapy)
Conversely, when patients who had expressed initial
resistance were effectively engaged with the programmeand therapy could progress, this was enormouslyrewarding for the nurses.
’And it was like watering a flower it was really lovelyfor me personally... it was lovely watching her just
blossom, you know what I mean, because she finally
took on board the physical stuff and the sleep. ’
(Nurse)
(iii) Dealing with emotion
A further set of challenges arose from the emotionalaspects of the therapy. Firstly, nurses had a range of
their own concerns and emotions that they had to man-
age, which included learning to manage potential (andoccasionally actual) failure.
’Therapist said to me, “Is this working for you?” and I
said, “No it ’sn o t ”. She took that very personally. I
wasn ’ta g g r e s s i v ea ta l l . ’(Patient, Supportive Listen-
ing group)
’One common theme I think which has come up is
the difficulty of accepting that you can ’tg e ti tr i g h t
all the time. ’(Supervisor)
Secondly, whilst their focus was on treating CFS/ME
with a view to improving the symptoms of the condi-
tion, nurses were aware that there were wider conse-quences of their intervention, which could be a causefor worry.
’I just hope she doesn ’t get a divorce...I am frightened
in case I open up a can of worms...I don ’tw a n tt o
leave an aftermath. ’(Nurse)
This was of particular concern since the therapy, as is
common within a primary care service, was for a rela-tively short prescribed period of time.
’We had patients where somebody will disclose to thenurse therapist in the first session that they weresexually abused as a child...in conventional therapythat is unusual, you would normally expect some-
body not to reveal something like that until they
have really established a g ood, trusting relationship.
But sometimes people are so desperate, you know,they have been holding this secret for 20, 30 yearsand here is somebody offering the chance of a trust-ing relationship; I will risk it. So then the material isout, you can ’t put it back...They [nurses] have talked
about issues like that and how to, how to deal with
something as deep as that, when you have only got
very few sessions. ’(Supervisor)
’This amount of counselling is dangerous. Because
what it does do is it opens up and it ’sn o tl o n g
enough to deal with the scratch, so what you aredoing is you are scratching the top off. I mean, notbecause I am going to fall apart at the seams, if itwas for someone else, then by the time you got to this
point in the time and it ’s finishing you have only just
scratched the surface but you started the process. ’
(Patient, Supportive Listening group)
A particularly difficult challenge of interacting with
patients for the nurses and their supervisors was mana-
ging patients’ resistance to the treatment. This arose
from patients not accepting the rationale for the treat-
ment and occurred for both types of psychological treat-
ments, though for different reasons.
’I used to go there and she would totally block me,
she would sit with her arms folded, total silence inthe house...she pulled out of the trial...it was tortuousfor both of us. ’(Nurse)
’There have been one or two times where I have been
worried because they have got angry at the patients...
that anger has been communicated to the patients.Their frustration has reached the point where theysort of boiled over... there is sort of feeling that thepatient should be grateful and follow your advice,and in actual fact, what happens is the patient isquite resistant and there is this thing like you know,“The bastards don ’tw a n tt og e tb e t t e r ”...I think it ’saPeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 7 of 13
difficult thing for all therapists and I think basically
over the time you just basically learn to cope with it,and but they have not had time. ’(Supervisor)
Managing patients ’emotions was an extremely
demanding aspect of their new role.
’That anger...it ’s very wearing and demoralizing. ’
(Nurse)
(iv) Complexity of primary care
A further set of challenges arose from working withinthe context of primary care. Within the sample there
was considerable comorbidity, including both physical
and mental health problems as ascertained with the helpof their supervisors. Medical health problems appearedcommon and required nurses to tailor therapy ( e.g.,
exercise advice) or advise patients to seek additionalmedical treatment; this was described by nurses as fit-ting comfortably within their expertise, and they wereable to draw upon their experience. Having a back-
ground in primary care medicine meant they were com-
fortable knowing when and where to obtain help formedical-related problems and making judgements aboutrisk. More challenging were patients ’mental health pro-
blems, which felt less familiar and on occasion dauntingto the nurses. Patients often also had social circum-stances that impacted therapy ( e.g., housing or relation-
ship difficulties). This is n ot to say that a primary care
sample necessarily has a greater level of social problems,rather, that by working with patients within this setting,these problems were more visible to the nurse.
’There are a lot of differences seeing things from the
primary care angle...you have to deal with moreuncertainty...you also really do hear accounts whichare somewhat sanitised when you see them in outpa-
tients...you get a much more direct assessment of
their life and this affects the whole flavour of whatone does, you put more weight to the social circum-stances if you are more directly aware of them. Seeingthem in outpatients you become much more detachedand then offer them a rigid programme. ’(Supervisor)
Nurses were even more aware of how patients were
functioning and the circumstances they were dealingwith since therapy was delivered in patients ’own
homes. This was thought to be helpful in building thetherapeutic relationship.
’Going into their homes, you are in their territory,
and they are more comfortable coping with the inter-vention because it is adaptable to the person ’s needs,and I think that has probably helped reduce conflict
for the whole study. ’(Supervisor)
However, it also meant the nurse therapists needed to
create additional boundaries over how they worked andhad to manage distractions, which could include chaotic
or deprived environments, lack of privacy, interference
from family members, and issues of personal security.
’Whole load of practical issues about homes, which
are sometimes disruptive, there are partners creepingaround, sometimes, they keep interfering with what isg o i n go n .T h en u r s e sf i n dt h a tu n c o m f o r t a b l es o m e -times, going into homes... sometimes they are very
squalid...which is not conducive to being a good
therapist. ’(Supervisor)
’When they [family members] are hovering around in
the background, I would rather have them in theroom with me, hearing what is going on, than walk-ing up and down and listening outside. Particularlywhen something has been said about them which isreally uncomfortable...where they are blaming, you
know, the other person for half of the condition or,
you know, blaming the trigger factors on other familymembers and things like that. ’(Nurse)
Strategies for managing tensions
A number of strategies were developed and identified byall parties to avoid or manage these potential tensions
(see Figure 1). Patients could (and occasionally did)
drop out of treatment: 19 out of 183 (9.6%) participantswithdrew after starting treatment [42]. Unless therewere clinical reasons why it was appropriate, nurseswere unable to discontinue treating a patient simply dueto tensions. However, they did describe cases wherethey had to just ‘get through ’.
’Thinking about individuals where this type of ther-
apy isn ’t helping, this is cases that we have had
through the trial...sometimes it ’s somebody that you
just can ’t, you get annoyed with, and you just think,
right, let ’s just ride it out, we are not going to change
things. ’(Nurse)
Nurses recognised that it was important to invest in
building a therapeutic alliance to engage patients, inparticular, explaining the rationale for the treatment andlistening to and va lidating patients ’illness experience.
This was highly valued by patients.
’What I found useful was not necessarily her specific
knowledge in terms of chron ic fatigue syndrome, but
her ability to spend time listening to me and helpingPeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 8 of 13
me with my issues. I think first and foremost who she
was, her empathic nature, was her greatest skill, any-thing else for me came secondarily, ’(Patient, Suppor-
tive Listening group)
Another important strategy for engaging patients was
to build in flexibility by, for example, re-ordering theprogramme for individuals.
’Very early on we realised that...do things that they
are going to get quick gain from and get them onboard, rather than giving them a challenge that theyare so frightened of that they won ’t do any of the pro-
gramme. ’(Nurse)
Nurses also reflected that flexibility was limited within
the trial setting (where treatment protocols were moretightly constrained) and that within a clinical settingthere would be options to defer treatment until a moresuitable time for the patient or to do some preparatorywork to help the engage the patient, such as providingmore sessions for more complex cases or choosing one
treatment over another. Patients also found ways to
build flexibility into their treatment.
’I have changed it and I have devised my own, I am
doing it in my own way. ’(Patient Pragmatic Rehabili-
tation group)
Supervision was viewed by nurses and supervisors as
fundamental in managing tensions arising from deliver-ing the therapy. Within supervision, nurses were helpedto formulate tensions that had arisen in order to under-stand what might be the causes and create potentialsolutions for overcoming these.
’I get them to think about why they have this feeling
about a patient and how not to let it interfere with
the start of the treatment and move it on... get them
to look at how they feel, use how they feel to workthrough the problem, see where the sticking point isfor them and see if that helps, as you say, unpick it;is it a problem with the person-to-person interactionor is it resistance? ’(Supervisor)
In some circumstances, this tension could be put to
use and provided opportunities for therapists to under-stand further a patient ’s experience and engage them.
’You get quite an interesting phenomenon because
you get the patient being angry with the therapist,because the therapist isn ’t giving them the therapy
they hoped they would get. That actually can bequite a useful vehicle for exploring what is going onin the patient’ s mind, what goes on in relationships
in their family, what part anger plays in their lifereally, erm, so it ’s not necessarily a bad thing, but it
does happen quite a lot.’ (Supervisor)
The type of supervision experienced was highly valued
and was viewed as qualitatively different from the super-vision experiences they received whilst working in non-mental health settings.
’I am well aware of different models of supervision,
and aware that, say, a CPN [community psychiatric
nurse] will have management supervision as well as
clinical supervision and they [general adult nurses]
are more used to having management supervision,which is quite prescriptive and quite directive andpersecutory quite often...I certainly think they havefound this very, I believe they have found it very sup-portive...I think they found it pleasantly different. ’
(Supervisor)
The nurses also made use of having peers with the
same skills and experiences. From this they derivedemotional support and generated new ideas to managechallenging cases.
’If we were having a really difficult time with a cer-
tain patient, then we would sort of pool ideas, andask advice how they would cope with it, the othernurse therapists or what do they think is going on.’
(Nurse)
Of all the strategies identified, effective supervision
was seen by the nurses as overwhelmingly the most use-
ful way of resolving the challenges identified.
’All of them were brilliant, they really were, I
couldn ’t have done without it really. I would have
left probably...I probably would have got another jobactually without the supervision, because it was toohard, too hard at times. ’(Nurse)
Discussion
This study identified implementation issues for nurse-led psychological interventions for LTCs., This paper
examined data from interviews conducted with thera-
pists, supervisors, and patients, during a randomisedcontrolled intervention st udy comparing two evidence-
based psychological treatments for CFS/ME delivered bynon-specialist nurses. Both interventions comprisedtherapeutic approaches known to be effective for otherLTCs, currently available in primary care, and that havepotential to have an increasing role in primary carePeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 9 of 13
nursing. To our knowledge this is the first study to sys-
tematically examine implementation concerns raised inrelation to non-specialist nurse delivery of treatment fora complex and challenging LTC –CFS/ME. We achieved
this by selecting experienced nurses, new to deliveringthese therapies, working in a well-supported clinical trial
context. Several challenges emerged common to both
therapies that had the potential for tension and evenconflict if implemented into routine practice. Thesechallenges arose from the practitioners ’changing role,
the demanding nature of delivering therapy and workingwith clients, and the organisational context withinwhich it was being delivered.
Working as a therapist is a qualitatively different role
to being a nurse, requiring adjustments to a new iden-tity, behaviours, and ways of interacting with patients.At times, this created concern for the nurses that theirexpertise was questioned by patients who, in contrast,had an unquestionable authority due to their long-termexperience of their symptoms [43] and knowledge of thecondition. According to independent ratings in a relatedstudy, the quality of the therapy delivery was satisfactory
to good [42]. However, our data suggest that experi-
enced general nurses lack the breadth of training in psy-chological treatments that would help with morechallenging cases. If the therapy had been conducted bya competent psychotherapi st without a professional
background in general medicine or primary care, differ-ent challenges would likely have arisen. Having a nur-sing background conferred clear advantages. It is likely
that no single group of workers are ideal for the role of
providing psychological treatment for patients withLTCs. For effective implementation it will be importantto promote realistic expectations regarding the level andrange of skills in delivering complex psychological andbehavioural interventions that can be learnt in relativelyshort periods.
Managing patients ’illness beliefs an dr e s i s t a n c et o
psychotherapy was a consistent theme across nurse,supervisor, and patient interviews. A similar finding hasemerged from non-specialist nurse delivery of CBT forhigh-utilising patients with medically unexplained symp-toms [13]. In both studies, nurses found patient beliefsand resistance to be the most emotionally challengingaspect of delivering psycholog ical therapies. This is not
surprising since dealing with resistance is a theme that
is common in supervisions [44]. For some patients,
these challenges were mild enough so that they could benegotiated or even used to some advantage. Nurse satis-faction with their role as therapists was derived whensuch instances were successfully negotiated. Throughexpert and peer supervision, nurses learnt that investingtime in building a trusting therapeutic relationship wascritical. Ensuring illness beliefs are aligned with thetherapeutic approach was essential to engaging patientsin treatment, a finding that is not peculiar to medicallyunexplained conditions, but is common across a wide
range of physical and mental health problems [40,45].However, our previous work with treating CFS/MEdemonstrated that when therapists and referrers are able
to successfully align trea tment and illness beliefs,
patients are able to successfully engage in and complete
therapy [46].
The environment within which therapy took place in
itself provided a challeng e and had the potential to
cause tension. Patients with CFS/ME were referred tothe treatment trial directly by their GP rather than, asmight be typical in a secondary care setting, after
screening by a specialist. This resulted in a heteroge-
neous sample with a wide range in levels of disabilityand mental health and medical comorbidity; over half ofthe trial sample reported one or more medical condi-tions that did not explain their fatigue, with the mostcommon being musculoskeletal, gastrointestinal, or car-diovascular conditions [42]. Despite high levels of addi-tional medical problems, nurses proved able to tailor
therapy to account for these problems. This is an advan-
tage of employing non-specialist nurses who have exper-tise working with medical problems, and this was anarea the nurse therapists felt confident and familiarwith. In contrast, managing psychiatric comorbidity wasmore challenging, and nurses frequently sought supervi-sors ’expertise on mental health matters. Indeed, the
most appropriate role for the non-specialist nurses may
be to work with cases where medical problems predomi-
nate and to identify more complex cases where specialistmental health intervention is required and facilitate anappropriate stepped referral [11].
Working in primary care, particularly within a domi-
ciliary service, increased the proximity of the therapistto the social context within patient lived. Elsewhere, thishas been shown to challenge nurses with having to
choose either a ‘guest ’or ‘professional ’position during
interactions in patients ’homes [47]. At times social cir-
cumstances hindered therapy considerably. In another
study we found the number of social problems and levelof social support to be associated with adherence to thetherapy [48]. These findings might help explain thereduction in consistency and effect sizes for primarycare treatments compared to those in secondary care
[ 7 ] .T h ec o m p l e x i t yo fw o r k i n gi np r i m a r yc a r el e d
nurses to apply therapy more flexibly than might be thecase within a secondary care service, a strategy thatshould be considered when translating secondary careinterventions to primary.
This study systematically gathered data from three dif-
ferent perspectives. This is an effective way of increasingthe trustworthiness of the analysis [38]. A further
Peters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 10 of 13
strength of the study was the high level of recruitment,
with 98% of patients approached agreeing to take partin the qualitative interviews. Purposive sampling enabledus to access a wide range of views. In particular, andunusually, the sample included participants who hadchosen not to take part in, or had withdrawn from, ther-
apy. This allowed us to examine the views of those
where tensions and conflict may have been greatest,resulting in breakdown of the relationship ( e.g., patients
who had withdrawn from treatment). Patient attrition isoften higher when implementing psychological interven-tions outside the resources of a research trial [49] sothese are critical data to inform future developments.
A limitation of the study was the small sample of
nurse therapists and supervisors available for interview,although we interviewed all those involved in the trialand they all had remained in post throughout the study.These interviews were lengthy and rich (and in the caseof the nurses, were repeated on two occasions to cap-ture evolution in their views), and themes were onlyincluded in the final analysis where corroboratory evi-dence was found from the very substantial patient data
set.
All the patients in this study had CFS/ME, and it is
possible that the challenges found may not generalise to
patients with other LTCs. However, as a condition,
CFS/ME combines a number of features that are com-mon to other LTCs, including a range of physical symp-toms that impact on a number of domains andfunctioning, wide range of illness beliefs, and comorbid-
ity with other physical and mental health conditions.
Furthermore, challenges were only included in the ana-lysis and reported here when they had potential to berelevant to non-CFS/ME co nditions. Nevertheless,
whether the same challenges face nurses deliveringother therapies to other patient groups is an empiricalquestion and further research is needed for clarification.
An additional potential limitation is that we only stu-
died the experiences of delivering two psychologicalinterventions, and additional or different challenges mayemerge for other treatment approaches. PR (combiningaspects of CBT and GET) and SL represent the treat-ment approaches with the strongest evidence base forthis LTCs, treatment approaches that are recommendedby NICE (25) and so are most likely to be utilised infuture clinical services within routine primary care.
However, the effects of PR within the trial compared to
usual GP care were modest, and in the case of SL, notsignificantly beneficial [42]. It is possible that the chal-lenges identified within this study were peculiar to theseparticular treatment approaches and fewer challengesmay have arisen within a trial that had demonstratedgreater effects. However, since evidence for all chal-lenges were found across treatments and we purposivelysought to include participants in each arm who had agood outcome as well as those who had not benefitedfrom each intervention, this is unlikely. Indeed, sinceeffect sizes are generally d iluted when implementing
treatments to routine practice [49], it is probable thatthe tensions we identified would be more pronounced
outside a trial setting.
The amount and type of supervision the nurses
received was not typical of what would be experienced
in routine primary care. Our therapists received clinicalsupervision every two weeks by experts in each treat-ment approach. This supervision ‘best practice’ has been
recognised as a key reason why effects from researchfindings often fail to transla te to clinical practice [49].
Primary care nurses within routine practice recognisethat supervision is a core prerequisite for effective deliv-ery of psychological interventions in primary care butare sceptical that training and ongoing support wouldbe sufficient [27]. Where av ailable (here in a research
trial) the nurses made great use of, and highly valued,their supervisors ’expertise to help them address and
resolve tensions. Outside of research settings, clinical
supervision is a valued and effective method for devel-
oping nurses ’knowledge, skill, professional accountabil-
ity, and for reducing staff burnout [50]. However, thistype of supervision is far more common in the mentalhealth and aged care compared with physical health orprimary care nursing [50]. Hence it is unclear how likelyit is that general nurses working within a primary caresetting would have regular access to high-quality clinical
supervision. Successful impl ementation of nurse-deliv-
ered psychological interven tions for complex problems
has utilised high levels of expert psychological supervi-
sion [13]. The costs and time needed to train nurses issignificant, and effective su p e r v i s i o nc a np l a yar o l ei n
retention of therapists, an issue that has hindered pre-vious implementation efforts [49]. Future researchshould examine the effectiveness and cost effectiveness
of adequately supported nurse-led psychological inter-
ventions and identify ways of delivering this across pri-mary care settings.
The creation and resourcing of appropriate supervi-
sion is a fundamental issue to be addressed if nurses areexpected to effectively deliver psychological interven-tions to patients with complex LTCs within primarycare. This role may prove a more efficient use of the
limited resources within primary care. There is also the
potential for peer supervision to support this process[51], though this would require experienced nurses tobe working in this way within a given locality.
Conclusions
Expanding the role of non-specialist primary care nursesto include delivering psychological interventions forPeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 11 of 13
patients with LTCs such as CFS/ME creates a number
of challenges. Quality clinical supervision to support
nurses is necessary if this is to become a feasiblepractice.
Acknowledgements
This paper is written by the authors on behalf of the FINE Trial Group.The FINE Trial Group consists of Colette Bennett, Richard Bentall, Laura
Booth, Joanna Brooks, Greg Cahill, Anna Chapman, Carolyn Chew-Graham,
Susan Connell, Christopher Dowrick, Graham Dunn, Deborah Fleetwood,Laura Ibbotson, Diana Jerman, Karina Lovell, Jane Mann, Richard Morriss,Sarah Peters, Pauline Powell, David Quarmby, Gerry Richardson, Lisa Riste,Alison Wearden, and Jennifer Williams.We are indebted to all the participants of the study.The study was funded by the Medical Research Council G200212 [ISRCTN
74156610]. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the MRC. Ethical approval: MREC approval wasgranted (04/MREC03/30) and Primary Care Trust Research and Developmentresearch governance approval was granted from all trusts involved.
Author details
1School of Psychological Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
2School of Community Health Sciences, University of Nottingham,
Nottingham, UK.3School of Population, Community and Behavioural
Sciences, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.4School of Nursing, Midwifery
and Social Work, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.5Centre for
Applied Psychological Research, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, UK.
6School of Community Based Medicine, University of Manchester,
Manchester, UK.Authors ’contributions
SP and CCG designed and managed the qualitative study. They contributed
to the data collection, analysis, and early drafts of the paper. SP is guarantorfor the study and paper. AW was principle investigator for the trial from
which participants were recruited. GC and JB collected data and contributed
to the analysis. AW, RM, KL, and CFD contributed to data analysis andrevising the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Received: 28 March 2011 Accepted: 22 December 2011
Published: 22 December 2011
References
1. Roland M, Sibbald B, McDonald R: Care closer to home. Moving care.
Health Service Journal 2007, 117(6065) :6-8.
2. Department of Health: The NHS Plan London: Department of Health; 2000.
3. Coventry P, Gellatley J: Improving outcomes for COPD people with mild-
to-moderate anxiety and depression: a systematic review of cognitive
behavioural therapy. British Journal of Health Psychology 2008, 13:381-400.
4. Dixon KE, Keefe FJ, Scipio CD, Perri LM, Abernethy AP: Psychological
interventions for arthritis pain management in adults: A meta-analysis.Health Psychology 2007, 26(3) :241-250.
5. Morley SJ, Eccleston C, de C Williams AC: Systematic review and meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials of cognitive behaviour therapyand behaviour therapy for chronic pain in adults, excluding headache.Pain 1999, 80:1-13.
6. Hoffman BM, Papas RK, Chatkoff DK, Kerns RD: Meta-analysis of
psychological interventions for chronic low back pain. Health Psychology
2007, 26:1-9.
7. Raine R, Haines A, Senskey T, Hutchings A, Larkin K, Black N: Systematic
review of mental health interventions for patients with commonsomatic symptoms: can research evidence from secondary care beextrapolated to primary care? British Medical Journal 2002, 325:1-11.
8. Trude S, Stoddard JJ: Primary care physicians and mental health services.
Journal of General Internal Medicine 2003, 18:442-449.9. St Peter RF, Reed MC, Kemper P, Blumenthal D: Changes in the scope of
care provided by primary care physicians. The New England Journal of
Medicine 1999, 26:1980-1985.
10. Gemmell I, Campbell S, Hann M, Sibbald B: Assessing workload in general
practice in England before and after the introduction of the pay-for-
performance contract. Journal of Advanced Nursing 2009, 65(3) :509-515.
11. Katon W, Von Korff M, Lin E, Simon G: Rethinking practitioner roles in
chronic illness: the specialist primary care physician, and the practice
nurse. General Hospital Psychiatry 2001, 23:138-144.
12. Glasgow ACA, Glasgow JA: Development of a nurse-led chronic pain
clinic in UK primary care. International Journal of Clinical Practice 2002,
56(1) :21-25.
13. Lyles JS, Hodges A, Collins C, Lein C, Given CW, Given B, et al:Using nurse
practitioners to implement an intervention in primary care for high-utilizing patients with medically unexplained symptoms. General Hospital
Psychiatry 2003, 25:63-73.
14. Kennedy T, Jones R, Darnley S, Seed P, Wessely S, Chalder T: Cognitive
behaviour therapy in addition to antispasmodic treatment for irritablebowel syndrome in primary care: randomised controlled trial. British
Medical Journal 2005, 331(7514) :435-437.
15. Whittlemore R, Melkus GD, Sullivan A, Grey M: A nurse-coaching
intervention
for women with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Educator 2004,
30(5) :795-804.
16. Sciamanna CN, Alvarez K, Miller J, Gary T, Bowen M: Attitudes toward
nurse practitioner-led chronic disease management to improveoutpatient quality of care. American Journal of Medical Quality 2006,
21(6) :375-381.
17. Fukuda K, Straus SE, Hickie I, Sharpe MC, Dobbins JG, Komaroff A: The
international chronic fatigue syndrome study group. The chronic fatiguesyndrome: a comprehensive approach to its definition and study. Annals
of Internal Medicine 1994, 121(12) :953-959.
18. Department of Health: CFS/ME Working Group Report of the Report to the
Chief Medical Officer of an Independent Working Group London; 2002.
19. McCrone P, Darbishire L, Ridsdale L, Seed P: The economic cost of chronic
fatigue and chronic fatigue syndrome in UK primary care. Psychological
Medicine 2003, 33(2) :253-261.
20. Cairns R, Hotopf M: A systematic review describing the prognosis of
chronic fatigue syndrome. Occupational Medicine 2005, 55:20-31.
21. Price JR, Mitchell E, Tidy E, Hunot V: Cognitive behaviour therapy for
chronic fatigue syndrome in adults. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 2008, 3.
22. Chambers D, Bagnall AM, Hempel S, Forbes C: Interventions for the
treatment, management and rehabilitation of patients with chronic
fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis: an updated systematic
review. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine 2006, 99(10) :506-520.
23. Ridsdale L, Godfrey E, Chalder T, Seed P, King M, Wallace T, et al:Chronic
fatigue in general practice: is counselling as good as cognitivebehaviour therapy? A UK randomised trial. British Journal of General
Practice 2001, 51(462) :19-24.
24. Mellor-Clark J, Simms-Ellis R, Burton M: National Survey of Counsellors in
Primary Care: Evidence for Growing Professionalisation. Occasional Paper
79. London: Royal College of General Practitioners 2001.
25. NICE CF 53: Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (or
encephalopathy): guideline. London; 2007.
26. Huibers M, Beurskens A, Van Schayk C, Bazelmans E, Metsemakers J,
Knottnerus J, Bleijenberg G: Efficacy of cognitive-behavioural therapy by
general practitioners for unexplained fatigue among employees.Randomised controlled trial. British Journal of Psychiatry 2005, 184:240-246.
27. Chew-Graham C, Dixon R, Shaw JW, Smyth N, Lovell K, Peters S: Practice
nurses ’views of their role in the management of chronic fatigue
syndrome/Myalgic Encephalitis: a qualitative study. BMC-Nursing 2009,
8:2.
28. Rothwell PM: Can overall results of clinical trials be applied to all
patients? Lancet 1995, 345:1616-1619.
29.
May C: A rational model for assessing and evaluating complex
interventions in health care. BMC - Health Services Research 2006, 6:86.
30. Wearden AJ, Riste L, Dowrick C, Chew-Graham C, Bentall R, Morriss R,
Peters S, Dunn G, Richardson G, Powell P: Fatigue Intervention by Nurses
Evaluation - The FINE Trial. A randomised controlled trial of nurse led
self-help treatment for patients in primary care with chronic fatiguePeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 12 of 13
syndrome: study protocol [ISRCTN74156610]. BioMed Central-Medicine
2006 [http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7015/4/9].
31. Powell P, Bentall RP, Nye FJ, Edwards RHT: Randomised controlled trial of
patient education to encourage graded exercise in chronic fatigue
syndrome. British Medical Journal 2001, 322(7283) :387-390.
32. Morriss R, Gask L, Smith C, Battersby L: Training practice nurses to assess
and manage anxiety disorders: A pilot study. Nursing Times Research 1999,
4:132-142.
33. Sharpe M, Archard L, Anatvala J, Borysiewicz L, Clare A, Edwards R,
Hawton K, Lambert H, Lane R, McDonald E, Mowbray J, Pearson D, Peto T,Preedy V, Smith A, Smith D, Taylor D, Tyrrell D, Wessley S, White P: A report
- Chronic fatigue syndrome - guidelines for research. Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine 1991, 84:118-121.
34. Chalder T, Berelowitz G, Pawlikowska T, et al:Development of a fatigue
scale. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 1993, 37(2) :147-153.
35. Ware JE, Sherbourne CD: The MOS 36-item short-form health survey (sf-
36). 1. conceptual-framework and item selection. Medical Care 1992,
30(6) :473-483.
36. Muran JC, Gorman BS, Safran JD, Twining L, Samstag LW, Winston A:
Linking in-session change to overall outcome in short-term cognitivetherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 1995, 63:651-657.
37. Malterud K: Qualitative research: standard, challenges and guidelines.
Lancet 2001, 358:483-488.
38. Peters S: Qualitative methods and mental health research. Evidence Based
Mental Health 2010, 13:35-40.
39. Strauss A, Corbin J: Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures
for Developing Grounded Theory. 2 edition. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA; 1998.
40. Moss-Morris R, Petrie K, Weinman J: Functioning in chronic fatigue
syndrome: do illness perceptions play a regulatory role? British Journal of
Health Psychology 1996, 1:15-21.
41. Wearden AJ, Dowrick C, Chew-Graham C, Bentall RP, Morriss RK, Peters S,
Riste L, Richardson G, Lovell K, Dunn G: Fatigue Intervention by Nurses
Evaluation - The FINE Trial. A randomised controlled trial of a nurse-ledhome-based self-help treatment for patients in primary care withchronic fatigue syndrome [ISRCTN 74156610]. British Medical Journal 2010,
340:c1777.
42. Peters S, Stanley I, Rose M, Salmon P: Patients with medically unexplained
symptoms: sources of patients ’authority and implications for demands
on medical care. Social Science and Medicine 1998, 46(4-5) :559-565.
43. Marshall AA, Smith RC: Physicians ’emotional reactions to patients:
recognizing and managing countertransference. American Journal of
Gastroenterology 1995, 90:4-8.
44. Leventhal H, Diefenbach M, Leventhal EA: Illness cognition: using
common sense to understand treatment adherence and affect cognitioninteractions. Cognitive Therapy and Research 1992, 16:143-163.
45. Hagger MS, Orbell S: A meta-analytic review of the common-sense
model of illness representations. Psychology & Health 2003, 18:141-184.
46. Chew-Graham C, Brooks J, Wearden A, Dowrick C, Peters S: Factors
influencing engagement of patients in a novel intervention for CFS/ME:a qualitative study. Primary Health Care Research & Development 2010, 1-11.
47. Oresland S, Maatta S, Astrid N, Jorgensen MW, Lutzen K: Nurses as guests
or professionals in home health care. Nursing Ethics 2008, 15(3) :371-383.
48. Morriss R, Bennett C, Fleetwood D, Connell S, Bentall RP, Riste L,
Wearden A: Adaptations and adherence to pragmatic rehabilitation
delivered to patients with chronic fatigue syndrome by general nursesin primary care. (under submission). .
49. Scheeres K, Wensing M, Knoop H, Bleijenberg G: Implementing cognitive
behavioural therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome in a medical healthcenter: a benchmarking evaluation. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology 2008, 76(1) :163-171.
50. Brunero S, Stein-Parbury J: The effectiveness of clinical supervision in
nursing: an evidenced based literature review. Australian Journal of
Advanced Nursing 2007, 25(3) :86-94.
51. Teasdale K, Brocklehurst N, Thom N: Clinical supervision and support for
nurses: an evaluation study. Journal of Advanced Nursing 2001,
33(2) :216-224.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-6-132
Cite this article as: Peters et al .:Challenges of nurse delivery of
psychological interventions for long-term conditions in primary care: aqualitative exploration of the case of chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgicencephalitis. Implementation Science 2011 6:132.Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitPeters et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:132
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/132Page 13 of 13
