STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
A study protocol for applying the co-creating
knowledge translation framework to a population
health study
Kathryn Powell1*, Alison Kitson2, Elizabeth Hoon1, Jonathan Newbury3, Anne Wilson4,5and Justin Beilby6
Abstract
Background: Population health research can generate significant outcomes for communities, while Knowledge
Translation (KT) aims to expressly maximize the outcomes of knowledge producing activity. Yet the two approaches
are seldom explicitly combined as part of the research process. A population health study in Port Lincoln, South
Australia offered the opportunity to develop and apply the co-KT Framework to the entire research process. This is
a new framework to facilitate knowledge formation collaboratively between researchers and communities
throughout a research to intervention implementation process.
Design: This study employs a five step framework (the co-KT Framework) that is formulated from engaged
scholarship and action research principles. By following the steps a knowledge base will be cumulatively co-created
with the study population that is useful to the research aims. Step 1 is the initiating of contact between the
researcher and the study contexts, and the framing of the research issue, achieved through a systematic data
collection tool. Step 2 refines the research issue and the knowledge base by building into it context specific details
and conducting knowledge exchange events. Step 3 involves interpreting and analysing the knowledge base, and
integrating evidence to inform intervention development. In Step 4 the intervention will be piloted and evaluated.
Step 5 is the completion of the research process where outcomes for improvement will be instituted as regular
practice with the facilitation of the community.
In summary, the model uses an iterative knowledge construction mechanism that is complemented by external
evidence to design interventions to address health priorities within the community.
Discussion: This is a systematic approach that operationalises the translational cycle using a framework for KT
practice. It begins with the local context as its foundation for knowledge creation and ends with the development
of contextually applicable interventions. It will be of interest to those involved in KT research, participatory action
research, population health research and health care systems studies. The co-KT Framework is a method for
embedding the principles of KT into all stages of a community-based research process, in which research questions
are framed by emergent data from each previous stage.
Keywords: Knowledge translation, Population health, Knowledge creation, Knowledge translation model,
Action research, Knowledge framework, Community health
* Correspondence: kathryn.powell@adelaide.edu.au
1School of Population Health, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005,
Australia
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2013 Powell et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
Background
Population health is concerned with health outcomes
within an aggregated group of people, and research onpopulation health considers the impact of environmental
and system variables on the distribution of those health
outcomes [1]. It is a research domain that has receivedlimited attention within the KT field. Two aspects have
been identified as being relatively absent in population
health studies: non-quantitative studies and the incorpor-ation of people as agencies within a health system [2]. This
protocol describes how the co-KT Framework incorpo-
rates KT into a population health research study.
The impact of KT on population health studies is of
interest to the research community, as there is a need for
empirical studies of the effectiveness of KT in improvingthe health of the population by changing practices [3].
Others have identified priorities for KT development work
such as the need for better structural conceptualising ofKT and the need to adapt KT strategies to context [3]. Fur-
ther it has identified that the majority of researcher-
practice frameworks address only one phase (sometimestwo) of the process of research-practice translation [4].
Within this study, we apply the co-KT Framework to that
phase of KT concerned with moving discoveries into com-munities, and then extended to organisations and policy
developers, which has been described as T3 [5]. This area
is still being defined in scope [6].
Population health has been the subject of limited KT re-
search approached in a systematic way [7], and there are
very few KT intervention studies with a focus on publichealth and prevention and whole systems redesign [8].
Lightfoot et al. (2008) describe ways of conducting popula-
tion based health research in rural areas, emphasisingearly stakeholder involvement if the study is proposed by
external researchers and suggesting a community needs
assessment to help to build community and funding sup-port for the proposed study [9]. Ogilvie et al. discuss a
translational framework for public health research, shifting
the focus to the improvement of population healththrough individual and collective determinants of health
[10]. This is a clear difference from embedding evidence-
based interventions. In public health planning frameworks
generally, tacit knowledge is not referred to as a legitimate
source of knowledge nor do they pragmatically suggesthow this knowledge might be elicited [11].
This protocol describes how KT is being conducted
within The Physiology of Health Systems: Port Lincoln asa Case Study (the LINKIN Health Study, National Health
and Research Council project grant 627240, 2010 –12).
The research team is finding a way to link evidence to is-sues within a particular context rather than applying evi-
dence and identifying barriers. The LINKIN Health Study
is a mixed methods study of the population of PortLincoln, South Australia (population: 14,000 people) [12].The approach described in this paper is intended to pro-
vide detailed insight into the use of both formal and infor-
mal sources of health-care and into the extent and patternof any mis-alignment between established morbidity and
use or provision of services. This is in contrast to solely
using epidemiological tools to map person-based data onuse of health services and limiting the evidence base to in-
formation collected by quantitative methods.
There is no favoured operational KT approach for a total
research project process. We found that KT frameworks
tended to separate the knowledge generation process from
the actual implementation of knowledge [13-15]such asthose that addressed evidence-based practice or the diffu-
sion of knowledge process, the effectiveness of KT imple-
mentation, in the form of interventions, or the uptake ofevidence and articulating conditions for successful KT
[16-22]. The KT framework we have applied (the co-KT
Framework) does not begin by applying evidence-basedpractice but concentrates on allowing the emergence of
context specific data.
Our framework is presented as a means whereby KT
within a research study may provide a structured means
of developing a shared understanding of a problem and
its underlying factors [23].
Recognition of the move to develop community inter-
ventions that take account of the complex array of
causal factors underlying health inequalities has beenimportant to the study team [24]. We also wanted to
shape a methodological approach that was not confined
to a single-issue intervention but rather used the re-search process to open up the possibility of addressing
community systemic conditions [24]. The framework
goes some way to working on the little addressed aspect ofthe ways in which the interaction between multiple players
in a system might be managed and knowledge inter-
mediation (managed processes of knowledge interaction)[25,26].
This protocol describes how a theory informed concep-
tual framework for KT will be applied in a populationhealth study that sets out to fo rmalise collaborative ap-
proaches within the design, whilst differentiating between
the roles of both the stakeholders and the researchers. The
protocol describes the application of a KT framework to a
mixed methods population health study. A separate proto-col relates to the mixed methods design itself. The protocol
d e m o n s t r a t e st h ed e l i b e r a t ei n c o r p o r a t i o no ft h et h e o r i e s
of engaged scholarship [27,28] and practice of participatoryaction [29] as we put research generated knowledge as a
key driver of improved health care. In particular, we see
these underlying theoretical foundations as enabling theco-learning and co-construction of knowledge and under-
standing of that knowledge, the acknowledgement of a
range of social and environmental factors that impact onhealth, and including community involvement at all stagesPowell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 2 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
of the research process [29]. Action research and engaged
scholarship explicitly promote the concerns of the local
context and have the capacity to generate knowledge thataddresses local concerns [30]. There is an assumption
within these two theories that there may be multiple
sources of knowledge and that people within the commu-nity possess valid knowledge. We do not suggest know-
ledge is objective nor a set of context-free facts that must
be packaged for communities but rather we are respondingto the practical recognition that knowledge translation and
intermediation can be sites of conflict [25,26].We view
knowledge as a research tool and point of common en-gagement; knowledge is to be constructed and shaped, in
our study, for the purpose of improved population health.
Action research and engaged scholarship both focus
on the researcher –community relationship as a com-
bination that will yield effective research rewards [30].
We anticipated that this theoretical base would facilitatethe framing of research questions that were more mean-
ingful to the community (for example, rather than
specifying a reduction of ill-advised rates of health inci-dence, we could frame our issues for address in terms of
what might most benefit the community). There has
been recognition of the interf ace between participatory
oriented research and KT and the co-construction of
knowledge in a relationship that includes stakeholders
and researchers [31]. Commu nity-based participatory
research methods have directly addressed the researcher
and community relationship, and its role in the commu-
nity intervention process [24]. Clavier et al. found thatstrategic translation supports the research process and
facilitates the ongoing co llaborative involvement of
stakeholders [31]. A further point of congruence be-tween KT and participatory action research is that
community-based participatory research places signifi-
cance on actionable knowledge, and knowledge pro-duced through relationships and collaborative practice
[29]. It also considers the problem of synthesising evi-
dence which is important in a mixed methods design.
Methods
The LINKIN Health Study examines the health system
functioning within the rural population of a South Aus-
tralian town and takes place at the nexus of university
and community research. It aims to build knowledge for
the purpose of health reform between these two con-texts, using quantitative and qualitative data collection
as a foundation on which to develop suitable health in-
terventions [12]. The co-KT Framework is to form theintegrating and synthesising thread through the research
process and is led within the research team by a nomi-
nated sub-group which is a key feature of the studyprotocol.Aims of the co-KT framework
Within this population health study, a KT mechanismwas developed to:
/C15Produce community-based knowledge forapplication within and by the community toincrease the effectiveness of health service delivery
and health outcomes for agreed priority groups, and
in an integrative, cross-disciplinary way.
/C15Allow for the community-based adaptation of
externally derived knowledge to local health issues
guided by the research team.
The study context (or research setting)
Port Lincoln is a major city on the Eyre Peninsula, SouthAustralia. Port Lincoln is one of the nation's biggest com-
bined agricultural and fishing centre. It has a population of
14,726 (Australian Bureau of Statistics Estimated ResidentPopulation 2010). In the surrounding region of the Eyre
Peninsula the population has increased by 18% between
2001 and 2011 [32] and demographic projections state thatthe population of Eyre Peninsula will have more people
aged between 55 and 74 years over the next decade or so
[33]. Within Port Lincoln ’s population, Aboriginal people
make up 5.5% and overseas born people comprise 8.9%
with half being born in north-west Europe. In terms of the
physicality of their occupations, 18% classify themselves aslabourers and a further 15% have a trade or technical occu-
pation (ABS ERP 2010). Prior to the study commencing we
were aware that on Eyre Peninsula avoidable hospital ad-missions are higher than South Australia and Australia (for
diabetes complications, asthma, chronic obstructive pul-
monary disease, ear/nose/throat infections, dehydration,gastroenteritis), and 71% of all deaths in Eyre Peninsula at
ages 0 –74 years in the period 1997 –2001 were considered
to be avoidable (cardiovascular and cancer) [33].
Evidentiary inputs
The key evidentiary inputs for this protocol are:
/C15A purpose designed health census [ 12]
/C15Subsequent surveys of those persons reporting
specific prevalent conditions in the foregoing health
census and consenting to be re-contacted
/C15Focus groups with service providers.
Community engagement
Key community engagement information sources are:
/C15Face to face discussions with local service providers
/C15Face to face discussions with the residents (that is,
the potential service user population).
/C15Engagement of policy administration, and regional
governance bodies.Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 3 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
Establishing linkages with the community
An important part of the study design is to establish con-
nector mechanisms between the researcher context and
the study context. The value of knowledge brokers, bound-
ary spanners, networks and communities of practice, and
building in exchange processes between researchers and
knowledge users during a research study has been
highlighted [23]. These are mechanisms for researchers to
connect with the community [34]. In our study, boundary
spanners and other connectors are ways of drawing on tacit
knowledge within a community. We are also including
within our sphere of engagement stakeholders who may in-
fluence community change at regional levels such as local
government and organisational representation.
The study design incorporates the use of a variety of
other tools for establishing community linkages such as
internet based tools to mitigate against inability or lack
of incentive to use person based opportunities (including
a purpose developed web page and facebook page), pub-
licly available media (local newspaper and national/state
newspaper, radio), purpose developed study related in-
formation brochures and flyers, holding public meetings,
speaking at organisation meetings including regional
bodies, and promoting direct contact details (a project
email and contact telephone numbers).Basis of co-KT framework
In our model (shown diagrammatically in Figure 1) the
researcher context and the study context form the pillars
between which knowledge creation and its exchange is
bi-directional. The knowledge creation process is guided
by synthesising outputs from the researcher and study
contexts. This process may be described as dialogic, and
iterative, across the researchers and the knowledge users
[35]. The framework provides for a theory based design of
combining context-derived information, explicitly ac-
knowledging the value of tacit knowledge that is addressed
in combination with researcher understandings of
evidence-based options. The co-KT Framework [36] re-
quires the input and collaboration of the community and
draws on action research, including Participatory Action
Research (PAR), and engaged scholarship [27]. The frame-
work is not prescriptive about the type of data that forms
the evidence base.
The steps are designed to construct a co-learning ex-
perience about issues raised through the community
and framed as health related problems. Intelligence is
shared and reflected upon: a process of ‘curating know-
ledge ’(turning information into knowledge and identi-
fying the connections between it and the research
questions; making tacit knowledge explicit; integrating
Figure 1 Information to knowledge in the co-creating KT (co-KT) knowledge translation framework.Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 4 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
Table 1 Co creating knowledge translation method
Co-create KT Step Knowledge sought Tool(s) Strategies
Step 1: Initial contact and framing the issue.
Contact between the study
context and research contextoccurs in response to a broadly
phrased issue.Information from the study
context that covers a broadspectrum within the issue(s).Data gathering tool(s) that will
generate a pool of informationfrom which subsequent inquiries
can be refined.View research as a means and
not an end.
Establish a KT research lead
and advisory team within the
study.
Identify persons in both
contexts as points of contactand information.
LINKIN EXAMPLEIssue: What is the health status of
the people in Port Lincoln and
how do they utilise healthservices?Researcher context made initial
inquiry of population-wide
incidence of conditions.Quantitative data tool: Appointment of 3 boundary
spanners.Health Census –a written structured
survey to population of study contextvia households.Inclusion of local people as part
of the Health Census operationaldelivery team.
Use of varied media to convey
information about the research
Create a presence and identity byparticipation in local publicevents.
Step 2: Refining and testing
Research team lead the
knowledge refinement process
(of data and local evidence intocontext-relevant knowledge) byobtaining the perspectives of
multiple stakeholders.Contextual information to
interpret the quantitative data.
Qualitative data on defined
aspects of the initial issue.Community engagement
strategies, participatory action
research, information andknowledge products,communication strategies.Use of an action research
approach to methodically
explore a problem within adesignated context.
Use of facilitators, connectors,
boundary spanners,
knowledge brokers.
LINKIN EXAMPLE
Selection of four key issues suchas specific health conditions and
health service user groups in Port
Lincoln.Comparison of informationgathered with other data sources
such as national surveys.Validation and explanation from
the study context of the HealthCensus results.
Knowledge that was related to the
condition types nominated forfurther research. Knowledge on
equity of experience within the
study context. Knowledge on socialdeterminants.
Computer Assisted Telephone
Interviewing (CATI) results to becommunicated to stakeholders and
provide opportunity for input.Production of recorded source
data into accessible forms for thecommunity (newsletters, project
website, local radio, local
newspaper, printed copies of datapresentations).
Consultation strategy that included
identified stakeholders (healthservice providers, residents,and key organisations).
CATI (telephone) survey to
‘Health Census recontactees ’to obtain
more condition specific
information from study context.Boundary spanners.
Large scale campaign
Community meetings
Opportunities for open discussion
(eg library).
Focus groups.Creation of knowledge products
(newsletters, webpages, hard andelectronic copies of data
presentations).
Use of varied media channels
(radio, newspaper, internet).
Step 3: Interpreting, contextualising and adapting
Local evidence is refined and
tested against the existing
evidence. Contextual information
is incorporated into the evidencebase to provide a basis foradapting the knowledge to form
the basis for intervention
‘prototypes ’to be introduced
and tested in the study context.Customising intervention for
practitioners involved.Methods of developing and/or
canvassing options with those
stakeholders affected.Feedback to study context of
interpretation of evidence
base.
Development of options to
address the issues.Agreement on interpretation of
implications of knowledge base.Identification and prioritisationof key aspects to address.Part of the process of making
knowledge useful:interpretation, negotiation,
debate. The knowledge needs
to be linked or related to whatis already known orexperienced within the
community.Audit and feedback mechanism to
providers participating in theintervention development.
Participant observation,
Questionnaires, Interviews, focus
groups.Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 5 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
knowledge and shaping it so it is usable [37]). To illus-
trate the protocol, Table 1 is a ‘walk through ’of what is
involved in undertaking each step. Within each step
there will be knowledge particular to each group ofstakeholders, for which certain tools or methods will be
selected, and this will be undertaken in agreed ways by
the research team (strategies).
Step 1: Initial contact and framing the issue
In step 1, the key activities are to begin a relationshipwith the study context and commence data collection.Information, using both an initial data collection tool (a
health census) and community relevant data (profile of
health services both locally available and available from
external providers on a regular scheduled basis) will becollected that will be used as a basis to build a shared
understanding, which is cognisant of the community ’s
experience. Exploration of the prevalent health condi-tions is to be undertaken, taking into account the
community ’s perspectives and health care experiences
and the information needed to respond to the researchquestions.Table 1 Co creating knowledge translation method (Continued)
LINKIN EXAMPLE What stakeholders think of current
recommended best practice.Questionnaires Reference Bone and Joint
literature review.For the Bone and Joint condition
group Knowledge used to select features
that will be addressed throughpilot interventions.Interviews, focus groups.
This step would involve the
development of an intervention(s) that takes up community-
based knowledge and is includes
shaping by agents andparticipators within the context.The LINKIN study has not defined
its interventions as yet.Dialogue with stakeholders during
the development of the
intervention.
Perceived impact of intervention
by study context.
Step 4: Implementing and evaluating
Involvement, trial uptake and
response to interventions.Evaluation data. Communicate results and outcome
of evaluation.Consultation and evaluation
strategies.Extent and effectiveness of
intervention uptake andimplementation.Use of knowledge utilisation
strategies.Use of knowledge utilisation
measurement tools.
Use outcome measures for
each level of the health
system: patient level, healthpractitioner level and system(or organisational) level.Community engaged in
evaluating the interventions and
modifications for ongoing use.Qualitative data on why an
intervention was successful or
not effective, and how it couldbe improved.
LINKIN EXAMPLE
An intervention will be evaluated
in real-time to monitor itsreception and response in thecommunity. This step is framed
by examining how we would
define and resource theintervention.Knowledge about the features of
the intervention to retain insustained interventions.Routinely collected data (such as from
audits).Use of knowledge broker role.
Context appropriate responses to
evaluation data and extent of
agreement with evaluation data.Semi-structured discussion groups.
An example could be how
professionals might work better
to facilitate referral pathways
that work within Port Lincoln.Perceived impact and sustainability
of intervention by study context.Establish an awareness of
feedback being elicited at
completion of evaluation.
Step 5: Embedding into context and translating to other contexts
Within the research context,
evidence is formalised for localcommunity and for the wider
scientific community.Knowledge that is to be
included in final and lastingknowledge products.Guidelines Communication strategies of
research outcomes andongoing plans.
LINKIN EXAMPLE
Following the intervention the
research team leadsconsideration of how it might be
sustained and in what form.How might this influence funding
packages and reform taking placein primary care?Discussion groups with key agents
and participators from context.Inform the national health
agenda
Use of guidelines and process
documents. Elements of the intervention that
are particular to this context and
how adaptable the intervention isto other contexts.How does it lead to new research
questions?Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 6 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
Key contact people within the study context will be
identified to provide information about the study context
that might help to shape the research approaches in subse-quent phases of the study. In this initial step, we (the re-
search context) will emphasise being open and transparent
about sharing and collaborating with the study context.This is facilitated by the dissemination of research study
descriptions (through hard copy and electronic informa-
tion sources and promotion through information media).
Step 2: Refining and testing
In Step 2 the knowledge base will be refined and its levelof detail increased for application to the development of
interventions. The research team will steer an iterative
process of conveying information between the studycontext and the research context, with contributions
sought from both contexts in this incremental building
process. This reinforces the intent to cultivate respectedrelationships as an investment in the future acceptance
of interventions.
Issues for ongoing and in-depth research are defined
and agreed by considering shared information (for ex-
ample, through face to face contact).To do this, in prepar-
ation for the co-creation of knowledge, informationgained to date will be prepared into products that may be
discussed with the study context (powerpoint presen-
tations, pamphlets, and summary documentation). Thestrategies for knowledge exchange and building include
community engagement strategies, participatory action re-
search methods, focus and discussion groups, informationand knowledge products, and communication strategies.
Of special value is the incorporation of community con-
nectors such as boundary spanners, who are able to speakat community organisations and forums.
This process of data gathering, sharing and co-creating
will take place over several weeks.
Evaluation
Steps 2 –5 include the collection of evaluation data for the
purpose of testing the co-KT Framework. For example,
feedback mechanisms (questionnaires) will be used for the
variety of discussion forums that will include consultationswith close to all health service providers in Port Lincoln as
well as community support groups, focus groups for dis-
cipline specific providers, community group discussionsand open residential discussions. This step is about com-
mencing dialogue with the community and identifiable
stakeholders (in roles distinct from soley community) anddisseminating a first stage of data collection. It includes
ascertaining key priorities. In addressing the importance
of evaluation we have drawn on Buykx et al ’s framework
to monitor the impact of health services research [38].
Key sources of information for evaluation purposes will be
the study website ‘hits ’, the extent of coverage ofstakeholders (percentage of all stakeholders with whom an
initial dialogue was held), feedback data from question-
naires following consultations.
Step 3: Interpreting, contextualising and adapting
The goal of step 3 is to develop a body of evidence onwhich to target interventions and their subsequent
piloting. This will be based on the collation, synthesis
and analysis of knowledge from steps 1 and 2, and com-munications and discussions with the study context. The
meaning of the knowledge should be collaboratively
interpreted, for example, distinguishing between clinicalpractice issues and service gaps. Analysis of this evi-
dence and guided discussions with the study context will
support the determination of the principal issues to ad-dress, articulate underlying systemic props or con-
founders for better health care options.
Methods used in this step will include the use of know-
ledge products and targeted presentations and discussions
with those stakeholders likely to be impacted by any
planned change. Focus groups with relevant health serviceproviders (relevance determined by involvement with the
condition or health issue being addressed), and commu-
nity groups are further methods of creating knowledgetransfer and exchange opportunities.
Evidence synthesis
One of the issues for complex research projects in which
there are multiple sources of knowledge is the synthesis
and assemblage of that knowledge. There are five steps inthe co-KT Framework and knowledge is gathered in each
of these steps with the intent of translating knowledge into
practice. As a knowledge base is being cumulatively builtupon from different sources, one of the problematic
aspects can be synthesising and making sense of the infor-
mation at hand. We have constructed an evidence synthe-sis matrix (shown in Table 2) that is a sequential way of
working through information gathered in preceding steps
to work towards the development of interventions. Essen-tially, Table 2 shows how qualitative and quantitative in-
formation are aligned with the goals of the research study
to allow for decisions about interventions that will im-prove health outcomes for emergent community health
issues based on evidence of suitable interventions. The
arrow shows the direction of progression.
Evaluation
One aspect of interest in the evaluation will be on thequality of the data obtained in relation to its use for devel-
oping interventions that address emergent issues. Evalu-
ation will also need to consider how satisfactory was theprocess for determining the emergent issues (recognising
that not everyone is likely to agree with what has been se-
lected from among several health issues as priorities to bePowell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 7 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
addressed).There are two aspects of the study for which
evaluation of this step will be especially informative: firstly,the amount and content of knowledge available to the re-
searchers and secondly, how well the connections were
able to be drawn between the data collected and prioritiesand health issues targeted for address in this study. To
evaluate this component we propose to have a guided re-
searcher reflection session in which the multi--disciplinaryresearch team will respond to questions on these aspects
from the researcher context perspective. From the study
context, extent of concurrence as to priorities emergentfrom the data will be considered (responses to dissemin-
ation of data for example, suggestions of alternative prior-
ities, expressions of disagreement via telephone calls,website/twitter/email posts, and records of meeting dis-
cussions on the data and priorities).
Step 4: Implementing and evaluating
The next part of the study protocol is to implement inter-
ventions, premised on contextually valid evidence, on apilot basis. The interventions will have been determined
through the synthesis process and canvassed with key
stakeholders with their input in shaping the implementa-tion process. The particular interventions are intended to
be based on factors that will have the most impact on the
priorities identified through engagement and interactionprocesses and from the evidence synthesis process.
Here the research group will be instrumental in continu-
ing the knowledge gathering process of how well interven-tions have been implemented and the degree to which
outcomes are being achieved. Project management re-
sponsibilities will be established within the researcher con-text and regular communication maintained between the
researcher and study contexts. The study context is to be
engaged and involved in implementing the interventions,and monitoring their usefulness. The stakeholders must
be informed as to the monitoring and evaluation process
and understand the mechanics of the interventions.Suitable mechanisms for auditing (monitoring) the
intervention pilot will be introduced. Written instruc-tions about the intervention for implementation, includ-
ing data collection expectations and templates/methods
will be provided. Practical aspects include agreeing onthe length of time for which monitoring will be under-
taken and allocating responsibilities for data collection
(this will be dependent on the nature of eh interventionsdetermined).
During the implementation phase supports must be
considered for those practitioners who face the mostchange due to interventions introduced.
Evaluation
An important aspect in step 4 is the need for researchers
and the study context to actively critically reflect on the
suitability and effectiveness of the interventions for the de-sired outcomes, and ease, and cost-effectiveness of imple-
mentation. This should be undertaken after an agreed
monitoring period and time for data collection. Explora-tory measures will be collected during this phase to ensure
usefulness for longer evaluation data collected to be
established in Step 5. The information and implicationswill be shared, discussed and deliberated with reference to
next steps in semi-structured discussion groups involving
stakeholders. We highlight that our evaluation here isconcerned with the co-KT framework application to which
this protocol addresses, which must be distinguished from
the broader research protocol which will assess the effect-iveness of the interventions to improve health outcomes
(in accordance with the overall research project aims).
Evaluation for this co-KT framework step 4 will be di-
rected to how well the design of the intervention has
translated into practice and is addressing the intended
health issues prioirities agreed in step 2. Participant feed-back (implementers of the intervention and recipients of
the intervention) will be a key source as well as statistical
data from the point of delivery (unable to be specifiedTable 2 Evidence synthesis matrix
Steps Knowledge bases to conduct co-KT
StepsContent and data analysis
1 First data collection set Conditions seen to impact on the population and key associated characteristics
2 Emergent consultation issues Informative issues raised by health services and residents
3 Further data collection More in depth understanding of population use of service providers and key concerns relating
to health conditions of interest
4 Emergent consultation issues Informative issues raised by health services and residents
5 Application of knowledge: intervention
developmentFeatures of the health system to address:
Distillation of a range of health system features based on context related knowledge base
formed through preceding steps.
6 Question: is there an intervention
to...........[specify purpose]Agree on intent of potential intervention and explore wider evidence base and how
interventions might be aligned with robust context related knowledge base.
7 Define outcome expectations Nominate specific outcomes of changes introducedPowell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 8 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
until intervention formulated). A further important feature
to include is evaluation of population reach, that is, the ex-
tent to which the intervention reached those for whom itwas intended.
Step 5: Embedding into context and translating to other
contexts
Knowledge from the evaluation of Step 4 is to be assessed
and considered by both the researcher and study contexts.
Part of the study protocol and design of the co-KT Frame-
work is to follow-through the pilot stage to put in placeone or more health reforms to lead to better health out-
comes that might be evaluated over a longer period. Alter-
ations to the interventions may need to be introduced,and this is where context related engagement will impact
the success and uptake of research outcomes. A major
focus at this stage is ensuring stakeholders are engagedand committed to sustaining and owning the new prac-
tices that have emerged from the research study. A prac-
tical issue is the inevitable withdrawal of the researchteam from leading the process and the need to embed on-
going monitoring of the final determined intervention(s)
for an agreed subsequent period.
Key tangible aspects to mark this part of the study
protocol will be:
/C15a finished set of guidelines as to changes to beimplemented as having arisen from the research study
/C15a communication strategy for research based
products developed by the research team and made
accessible to the study population
/C15study results will be communicated to the study
context in the form of knowledge products
developed to translate the research findings and face
to face communications. It is also likely that theresearcher context will produce other knowledge
products such as written publications about
outcomes, learnings and interventions for widercommunication beyond Port Lincoln or in
compliance with funding bodies.
Evaluation
Evaluation of this step will take into account perceived util-
ity of the interventions in relation to the context issues
addressed (by users) and soundness of evidence base on
which they were formulated (researchers). There will also
be an evaluation of ease with which they able to be embed-
ded within the health system and communication of whatthey were to improve within the population health system.
It is intended to evaluate how well the stakeholders in-
volved in the implementation of the interventions were en-gaged. These evaluations will take qualitative forms.Description of Co-KT Framework components and
features
Knowledge
Knowledge is seen in the Co-KT Framework as the tan-
gible currency that is created, used, translated and
discussed between the research context, the study contextand broader interested contexts (journal audiences, policy
makers, other communities). Herein knowledge features
as a valuable commodity that is formed through the col-laborative efforts of the study and research contexts. It is
information that has multiple sources (health service
users, health service providers, and activity data, compar-able community data, evidence based literature) and in-
cludes tacit community knowledge.
Knowledge products
Knowledge products are critical to the co-KT Framework.
We have operated on the principal of disseminating alldata in summary form to the whole community. The value
and utility of the knowledge products is enhanced if a de-
gree of deliberation is taken in preparing them accordingto intended usage and target section of the population.
The LINKIN Health Study has found that knowledge
products from an early stage have generated requests fromthe study context for knowledge products that are specific
to organisational needs; for example study context specific
information to provide supporting evidence for grant ap-plications and to generate discussion on policy issues.
Evidence
We define evidence as information derived from empir-
ical data, qualitative data, researcher observation, and
comparable externally derived information (clearly iden-tified as such). They are the basis for producing know-
ledge products.
Context
In the co-KT Framework, two contexts are differentiated.
The study context is place-based and defined as the envir-onment, place or circumstances targeted for situating the
research. In other studies, the context might be an organ-
isation, several organisations linked by treatment or pa-tient pathway for example, or geographical population
(such as a suburb) or population segment (such as males).
The researcher context is defined as the person or groupresponsible for conducting research within and about the
study context. The researcher context is bound by the re-
search questions, ethics, timelines, a defined budget andexpected outcomes for external stakeholders.
Facilitation
Facilitation (easement) has been emphasised as import-
ant in knowledge translation when it comes to the im-
plementation of change. Kitson et al. (2008) proposePowell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 9 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
that facilitation will be more effective if the context (of
study) is understood and ‘diagnosed ’, and interventions
are tailor made to the context or circumstances of im-plementation [39]. Steps 1 –3 of the co-KT Framework
accommodate this function.
Use of connectors
The transference of knowledge between the two contexts
(researcher and study) requires mechanisms to formbridges and connect the contexts. We see this as a two-
way flow, to link university and research users [40].
People may be assigned roles as bridge builders in vary-ing capacities, or as linkage personnel who are able
move between the research context and the study con-
text [5,41,42].
The purposes of such roles are to:
/C15Mediate between the two contexts and moderate,translate and explain knowledge
/C15Identify other people or resources to facilitate thestudy project
/C15Provide culturally specific information that allow for
the appreciation of community traditions, symbolic
behaviours or practices that may be relevant toimproving population health outcomes [ 5].
T h er o l eo ft h e s ec o n n e c t o r sm a yb em o r eo rl e s s
formalised in knowledge translation; formal such as ac-
tively adapting information for audiences, or less formal
in that they speak and interact across contexts, talkingproviding key messages in terms that are understood.
Knowledge brokers are conduits between the research
context and study context and decision-makers, trans-mitting information across contexts, and they may work
as boundary spanners [41,42]. As a contrived device,
they may also be considered a way of intervening withinthe pattern of knowledge conveyance in the context
landscape [42], adopting a more direct, guided, rapid
and deliberate method that is controlled largely by theresearch context. This role may also be used as a device
to overcome dysfunctional communication or the ab-
sence of communication within the study context. Keyconnector roles we have identified are: an office holder
in local government, a researcher prominent in the local
Aboriginal community, and a local medical practitionerwho is also a chief investigator in the LINKIN Health
Study.
Stakeholder engagement
There is an acceptance that stakeholder participation in
research is more likely to strengthen consensus for changeand acceptance of models (because stakeholders feel their
interests have been included in the model development)
[43]. In the co-KT Framework, the term ‘stakeholder ’isunderstood to include knowledge users, health and service
providers and representative groups. There is no distinc-
tion between public and private entities.
Ethical issues
Ethics approval to conduct this study was received fromthe Human Research Ethics Committee, University of
Adelaide.
Discussion
The co-KT Framework is a theory based model for know-
ledge translation practice that has been shaped by the re-quirements of a particular population health study of a
mixed methods design. We see the co-KT Framework as
meeting a need faced by researchers, and in particular,multi-disciplinary teams of researchers when they strive to
conduct a community-based study or population health
study, to achieve research aims through the developmentof context- relevant knowledge. This resonates with the
call from Hartling et al. (2007) who state that there is an
urgent need for a better understanding of KT interventionsfrom a multi-disciplinary perspective, KT interventions
that are designed to target multiple professional groups,
and that health care delivery improvements will comefrom interdisciplinary collaboration [44]. There is also a
growing movement to reduce the distance between know-
ledge development and knowledge use, and linking thiswith the need to develop community interventions that
take account of several sources of health inequalities [24].
To address such complexity, there must be opportunity tohave an understanding of how each party to the research
process (researchers, communities and stakeholders) frame
a problem [45]. We believe we have opportunity for dis-cursive discussion within the framework steps.
The co-KT Framework recognises the translation de-
rived elements separated by Clavier et al. needed tooperationalize a framework; incorporating cognitive
practices (managing the research contents), strategic
methods (to conduct the research process and managerelationships across stakeholders) and logistic practices
(that relate to practical coordination) [31].
KT has been criticised for not considering sufficiently
methods whereby the end-users of interventions or inno-
vations might critically reflect on contextual related fac-
tors that might influence the embedding of an innovationwithin a context of practice [46].This protocol activates
the engaged scholarship theoretical basis of the co-KT
Framework in its participative form of research forobtaining the perspectives of different stakeholders and
for recognising different sources of data to develop the
most useful knowledge to address complex problems. Ac-tion research and PAR and engaged scholarship contain
principles of enjoining and involving both academic re-
searchers and situationally defined stakeholders within thePowell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 10 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
dynamics of building knowledge around a framed issue.
The protocol in particular illustrates how the expertise
and knowledge of researchers and communities might bebrought to bear on the health systems of a regional place
[28]. The co-KT Framework incorporates the study con-
text into the process of knowledge to evidence and evi-dence to innovation design, inviting critical reflection.
Here, we demonstrate in this approach a view that com-
munity engagement for KT is more than smoothing a pathto the implementation of interventions; it allows for an
understanding of how public health policies and local con-
text factors combine structuring the system, the reality,that must be navigated by individuals as the end-users to
self-manage their health.
We appreciate that in community-based KT work there
can be tension between what is considered evidence be-
tween clinicians and community-based organisations [47].
Kothari and Armstrong state that traditional KT ap-proaches may not be suitable for all health service deliv-
ery systems [47]. Co-KT, as an iterative knowledge
creation and translation process, may be better suited tocommunity-based research. By incorporating KT at the
knowledge creation (evidence building) stage, we have
emphasised our focus on health system re-design andtreatment of all stakeholders as part of a total health
system serving a defined population.
An important aspect of the incorporation of KT within
a population health study we suggest is the direction of
community engagement into a form of social action that
results in a health system change for the community thatgoes beyond simply research participation or engage-
ment by a university [2]. How well this will be done re-
mains to be seen but it is important at this stage of theprotocol design that inclusion of the community in the
knowledge building is more purposeful than local rela-
tionship building, and allows for the articulation bystakeholders of change options.
The protocol recognises the value of the social processes
used to undertake our research [2]. We have emphasisedface to face communication as a key form of relationship
building and communication within our framework [29]
and recognise that this poses its own dynamics and diffi-
culties with organisation. However, we also consider this a
better way to influence the credibility of the outcomes ofour research [29].
We are aware that there is a shortage of rigorous oper-
ational studies or evaluation of KT strategies [8].Dagenais et al. (2009) note that few studies present re-
sults on the effects of populations that are the subjects
of interventions [3]. The co-KT Framework incorporatesmethods of evaluation within each step and at the com-
pletion of the research study and attention will be given
to collating evaluation data from the LINKIN HealthStudy. We view the consulting itself as an interactiveknowledge transfer tool and its effectiveness will be
targeted for evaluation by qualitative means [48].
Methods of evaluation include feedback questionnaires,non-participant observation, interviews, assessment of
the relevance of documentation, and intervention spe-
cific data. Simple knowledge and research utilisationquestions will be employed as these have been demon-
strated to be effective [49]. One of the dimensions
intended for evaluation is ‘population reach ’, that is, how
many people did interventions resulting from the re-
search impact upon?
Challenges
There are likely to be several predictable challenges in
implementing a framework of this scope we foresee
pragmatic difficulties to be:
/C15Limited staff resources who will be concurrentlyengaged in information analysis and needing to
prepare outcome based knowledge products tomaintain momentum gained following data
collection
/C15Engaging with busy health professionals at times
that coincide with research steps and do not hold up
the information gathering processes too long
/C15Cultivating local trust when seen to be inclusive of
various stakeholders and building a ‘shared project
culture ’[50]
/C15Achieving project timeframes when both
community engagement and quantitative data
analysis are features of the research design and can
be time-consuming
/C15Avoiding ‘over consulting ’the community in
fulfilling the need for both information collection
and evaluation.
We also anticipate challenges where system reforms or
interventions are perceived as impacting on accustomed‘rewards ’systems or practices that are sustained within the
present local context that benefit some and not others.
The findings of the current study will further implemen-
tation science by presenting a systematic method for a KT
research process in a population health study that does
not have an intervention as its starting point. It begins by
eliciting the emergent predominant health issues from the
local population. In contrast to other models, co-KT hasprovided the framework in which the knowledge user
community, or study context, may be involved at the com-
mencement of the knowledge building process [22]. Beingable to report on its empirical use, both positive and unex-
pected outcomes will be of value to those researching
health in the community and addressing the need forcomplex interventions.Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 11 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
Competing interests
The authors declare they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
All the authors form the Knowledge Translation group within the LINKINHealth Study team. KP has led the writing and editing of this paper,
literature review, prepared drafts, and detailed the method of the Co-KT
framework. She is responsible for implementing the co-KT strategy withinthe LINKIN project. ALK led the conceptual development of the co-KTFramework and is responsible for the KT activity within the LINKIN project.
She positioned its main content in relation to the conceptual paper
describing the framework, revised drafts of the paper with KP and refinedconcepts. EH contributed to the design and implementation of co-KTstrategies for this project, commented on drafts and is project lead for
LINKIN. JN commented on drafts and is one of the local boundary spanners
in Port Lincoln. AW has facilitated stakeholder meetings with KP and EH inPort Lincoln and has reviewed drafts. JB leads the conceptual and researchdesign of the LINKIN health study and has reviewed all drafts. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
The LINKIN study was funded by the National Health and Medical ResearchCouncil as the “Physiology of Health Systems; Port Lincoln as a case study ”,
project grant 627240, 2010 –12. Professor Konrad Jamrozik (University of
Adelaide, 2008 –2010) initiated the research concept of a population health
census to inform health service re-design and assembled the multidisciplinaryteam accordingly. Professor Jamrozik passed away in March 2010.
We would like to acknowledge the contributions of our team members
Associate Professor Jenny Baker, Professor Jonathan Karnon, Professor JohnLynch, Professor Philip Ryan Associate Professor Deirdre J Whitford, Dr PremaThavaneswaran, Ms Emma Richards, and Ms Maxine Bradshaw.
Author details
1School of Population Health, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005,
Australia.2School of Nursing, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005,
Australia.3School of Population Health, The University of Adelaide, c/ PO Box
3200, Port Lincoln, South Australia 5606, Australia.4School of Medicine, The
Flinders University of South Australia, South Australia, Australia.5School of
Medicine, University of New South Wales, New South Wales, Australia.6The
University of Adelaide, Adelaide 5005, Australia.
Received: 20 June 2013 Accepted: 23 August 2013
Published: 29 August 2013
References
1. Kindig DA: Understanding population health terminology. Milbank Q
2007, 85:139 –161.
2. Labonte R, Polanyi M, Muhajarine N, McIntosh T, Williams A: Beyond the divides:
towards critical population health research. Crit Publ Health 2005, 15:5–17.
3. Dagenais C, Ridde V, Laurendeau M-C, Souffez K: Knowledge translation
research in population health: establishing a collaborative researchagenda. Health Res Pol Syst 2009, 7:28.
4. Young D, Borland R: Conceptual challenges in the translation of research
into practice: it ’s not just a matter of “communication ”.Trans Behav Med
2011, 1:256 –269.
5. Horowitz CR, Robinson M, Seifer S: Community-based participatory research
from the margin to the mainstream. Circulation 2009, 119:2633 –2642.
6. Woolf SH: The meaning of translational research and why it matters.
J Am Med Assoc 2008, 299:211 –213.
7. Craig P, Griffin S, Macintyre S, Wareham NJ: A translational framework for
public health research. BMC Publ Health 2009, 9:10.
8. Waters E, Armstrong R, Swinburn B, Moore L, Dobbins M, Anderson L,
Petticrew M, Clark R, Conning R, Moodie M, Carter R: An exploratory cluster
randomised controlled trial of knowledge translation strategies to support
evidence-informed decision-making in local governments (The KT4LG
study). BMC Publ Health 2011, 11:34.
9. Lightfoot N, Strasser R, Maar M, Jacklin K: Challenges and rewards of
health research in northern, rural, and remote communities.
Ann Epidemiol 2008, 18:8p.
10. Ogilvie D, Craig P, Griffin S, Macintyre S, Wareham N: A translational
framework for public health research. BMC Publ Health 2009, 9:116.11. Dobbins M, Edwards N, Kothari A, Rouse M, Rudman D, Sibbald S: The use
of tacit and explicit knowledge in public health: a qualitative study.
Implement Sci 2012, 7:20.
12. Hoon-Leahy C-E, Newbury JL, Kitson AL, Whitford DJ, Wilson A, Karnon J,
Baker J, Beilby JJ: The LINKIN Health Census process: design and
implementation. BMC Health Serv Res 2012, 12:
321.
13. Graham ID, Tetroe J, Group KTTR: Some theoretical underpinnings of
knowledge translation. Acad Emerg Med 2007, 14:936 –941.
14. Stetler CB, Damschroder LJ, Helfrich CD, Hagedorn HJ: A guide for applying
a revised version of the PARIHS framework for implementation.Implement Sci 2011, 6:99.
15. Kitson A: The knowledge-to-action cycle: identifying the gaps. CMAJ: Can
Med Assoc J 2010, 182:E73 –E77.
16. Draper AK, Hewitt G, Rifkin S: Chasing the dragon: Developing indicators
for the assessment of community participation in health programmes.Soc Sci Med 2010, 71:8.
17. Grimshaw JM, Thomas RE, MacLennan G, Fraser C, Ramsay CR, Vale L, Whitty
P, Eccles MP, Matowe L, Shirran L, et al:Effectiveness and efficiency of
guideline dissemination and implementation strategies. Health Technol
Assess 2004, 8(iii-iv):1 –72.
18. Francis J, Perlin JB: Improving performance through knowledge
translation in the Veterans Health Administration. J Contin Educ Heal Prof
2006, 26:9p.
19. Wathen CN, Sibbald SL, Jack SM, MacMillan HL: Talk, trust and time: a
longitudinal study evaluating knowledge translation and exchange
processes for research on violence against women.(Research)(Report).Implement Sci 2011, 6:102.
20. Ory MG, Cox DM: Linking Health and Behaviour .I nImproving the Quality of
Life: Recommendations for People with and without Disabilities. Edited by
Romney DM, Brown R, Fry PS. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers;
1995:89 –121.
21. Kitson A: Knowledge translation and guidelines: a transfer, translation or
transformation process? Int J Evid Base Healthc 2009, 7:124 –139.
22. Kiefer L, Frank J, Di Ruggiero E, Dobbins M, Manuel D, Gully PR, Mowat D:
Fostering evidence-based decision-making in Canada: examining the
need for a Canadian population and public health evidence centre and
research network. Can J Public Health 2005, 96:I1–I40. following 200.
23. Gagnon ML: Moving knowledge to action through dissemination and
exchange. J Clin Epidemiol 2011, 64:25–31.
24. Trickett EJ, Beehler S, Deutsch C, Green LW, Hawe P, McLeroy K, Miller RL,
Rapkin BD, Schensul JJ, Schulz AJ: Advancing the science of community-
level interventions. J Inform
2011, 101.
25. Greenhalgh T, Wieringa S: Is it time to drop the ‘knowledge translation ’
metaphor? A critical literature review. JRSM 2011, 104:501 –509.
26. Davies H, Nutley S, Walter I: Why ‘knowledge transfer ’is misconceived for
applied social research. J Health Serv Res Policy 2008, 13:188 –190.
27. Van De Ven AH, Johnson PE: Knowledge for theory and practice. Acad
Manage Rev 2006, 31:802 –821.
28. Van de Ven AH: Engaged scholarship: a guide for organizational and social
research. Oxford: OUP; 2007.
29. Lencucha R, Kothari A, Hamel N: Extending collaborations for knowledge
translation: lessons from the community-based participatory researchliterature. Evid Policy 2010, 6:61–75.
30. Small SA, Uttal L: Action-oriented research: strategies for engaged
scholarship. J Marriage Fam 2005, 67:936 –948.
31. Clavier C, Sénéchal Y, Vibert S, Potvin L: A theory-based model of
translation practices in public health participatory research. Sociol Health
Illn2012, 34:791 –805.
32. Australian Bureau of Statistics: 3218.0 Regional Population Growth Australia.
Canberra; 2013 [Catalogue Number: 3218.0].
33. Public Health Information Development Unit, The University of Adelaide:
The University of Adelaide: Population Health Profile of the Eyre Peninsula
Division of General Practice: a supplement. Australian Institute of Health andWelfare. South Australia: The University of Adelaide; 2007.
34. Nutley S, Walter I, Davies HTO: From knowing to doing. Evaluation 2003,
9:125 –148.
35. Nowotny H, Scott P, Gibbons M: Re-Thinking Science: Knowledge and the Public
in an Age of Uncertainty. 2007th edition. Oxford, United Kingdom: Polity; 2001.
36. Kitson AL, Powell K, Hoon E, Newbury J, Wilson A, Beilby JJ: Knowledge
translation within a population health study: how do you do it?Implement Sci 2013, 8:54Powell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 12 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
37. Freire J: Universities and web 2.0: Institutional challenges. 2008. Elearning
Papers Disponible en: http://www.elearningpapers eu Fecha de cosulta.
38. Buykx P, Humphreys J, Wakerman J, Perkins D, Lyle D, McGrail M, Kinsman L:
‘Making evidence count ’: a framework to monitor the impact of health
services research. Aust J Rural Heal 2012, 20:51–58.
39. Kitson AL, Rycroft-Malone J, Harvey G, McCormack B, Seers K, Titchen A:
Evaluating the successful implementation of evidence into practice
using the PARiHS framework: theoretical and practical challenges.
Implement Sci 2008, 3:1.
40. Vingilis E, Hartford K, Schrecker T, Mitchell B, Lent B, Bishop J: Integrating
knowledge generation with knowledge diffusion and utilization: a case
study analysis of the consortium for applied research and ecvaluation in
mental health. Can J Public Health 2003, 94:468 –471.
41. Contandriopoulos D, Brousselle A, Kedote NM: Evaluating interventions
aimed at promoting information utilization in organizations and
systems. Healthc Policy 2008, 4:89–107.
42. Contandriopoulos D, Lemire M, Denis JL, Tremblay E: Knowledge exchange
processes in organizations and policy arenas: a narrative systematic
review of the literature. Milbank Q 2010, 88:444 –483.
43. Walton RE, Gaffney ME: Research, action, and participation: "The
merchant shipping case". Am Behav Sci 1989, 32(5):582 –611.
44. Hartling L, Scott-Findlay S, Johnson D, Osmond M, Plint A, Grimshaw J,
Klassen TP: Bridging the gap between clinical research and knowledge
translation in pediatric emergency medicine. Acad Emerg Med 2007,
14:968 –977.
45. Murphy K, Fafard P: Taking power, politics, and policy problems seriously.
J Urban Health 2012, 89:10p.
46. Kontos PC, Poland BD: Mapping new theoretical and methodological
terrain for knowledge translation: contributions from critical realism and
the arts. Implement Sci 2009, 4:1.
47. Kothari A, Armstrong R: Community-based knowledge translation:
unexplored opportunities. Implement Sci 2011, 6:59.
48. Jacobson N, Butterill D, Goering P: Consulting as a strategy for knowledge
transfer. Milbank Q 2005, 83:23p.
49. Estabrooks CA: Modeling the individual determinants of research
utilization. West J Nurs Res 1999, 21:758 –772.
50. Bowen S, Martens P, Team TNtK: Demystifying knowledge translation:
learning from the community. J Health Serv Res Policy 2005, 10:203 –211.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-98
Cite this article as: Powell et al. :A study protocol for applying the
co-creating knowledge translation framework to a population health study.
Implementation Science 2013 8:98.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitPowell et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:98 Page 13 of 13
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/98
