Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology & Health
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Treating anxiety and depression in inflammatory
bowel disease: a systematic review
Kathryn L. Prendergast, Marissa A. Gowey, Margaux J. Barnes, Caroline V.
Keller, Caitlin Horne & John Young
To cite this article:  Kathryn L. Prendergast, Marissa A. Gowey, Margaux J. Barnes,
Caroline V. Keller, Caitlin Horne & John Young (2022) Treating anxiety and depression in
inflammatory bowel disease: a systematic review, Psychology & Health, 37:1, 105-130, DOI:
10.1080/08870446.2020.1867135
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2020.1867135
Published online: 26 Jan 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 762
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 2 View citing articles 

Treating anxiety and depression in inflammatory bowel
disease: a systematic review
Kathryn L. Prendergasta,b, Marissa A. Goweya, Margaux J. Barnesa,
Caroline V. Kellera, Caitlin Horneaand John Youngc,d
aDepartment of Pediatrics, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA;bDepartment
of Psychology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA;cDepartment of
Psychology, University of Mississippi, Oxford, MS, USA;dDelta Autumn Consulting, Oxford, MS, USA
ABSTRACT
Objective: Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) is associated with
higher rates of clinically significant anxiety and depression than inhealthy populations. Psychosocial interventions targeting anxiety
and depression in IBD have variable efficacy and disparate treat-
ment approaches, making treatment recommendations difficult.
The current study aimed to identify effective treatment compo-
nents across psychosocial treatment approaches for anxiety anddepression in IBD.
Design: A systematic review of psychosocial treatments for
anxiety and depression in IBD was conducted. Based on the
Distillation and Matching Model, treatments were coded and data
aggregated by intervention components, or practice elements(PE), to elucidate replicable clinical techniques.
Main Outcome: The percentage of studies utilizing a given PE
was the primary outcome.Measures: Among all included studies, as well as among those
finding favorable, significant effects on anxiety or depression,
the percentage utilizing each PE and number of PEs utilized
was determined.
Results: The most utilized PEs among included interventions
were relaxation, IBD psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring,
distraction, and social skills. Examining only interventions with
favorable differences on specified outcomes (HRQoL, Anxiety,
Depression, and/or Coping) indicated that relaxation, education,
cognitive restructuring, and mindfulness were most utilized.Conclusion: Implications for clinical practice are discussed, including
the development and dissemination of treatment recommendations.
Abbreviations: IBD: Inflammatory Bowel Disease; HRQoL: Health
Related Quality of Life; PE: Practice Element; CD: Crohn ’s Disease;
UC: Ulcerative Colitis; DMM: Distillation and Matching Model; CBT:
Cognitive Behavior Therapy; SFT: Solution Focused TherapyARTICLE HISTORY
Received 12 May 2020
Accepted 16 December 2020
KEYWORDS
Inflammatory bowel
disease; anxiety; depression;treatment; systematicreview
CONTACT Kathryn L. Prendergast kprender@uab.edu Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, The
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1600 7thAvenue South jMcWane Building Suite 5604, Birmingham, AL
35233, USA.
/C2232021 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupPSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH
2022, VOL. 37, NO. 1, 105 –130
https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2020.1867135
Introduction
Inflammatory Bowel Disease (IBD) affects approximately 3 million US adults (Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, 2018 ). These diseases, including Crohn ’s Disease
(CD) and Ulcerative Colitis (UC), develop due to chronic inflammation of the digestivetract commonly leading to diarrhea, abdominal pain, weight loss, nausea, and urgent
bowel movements (NIH, 2014 ,2017 ). Both conditions are characterized by periods of
active disease followed by remission that may last from several weeks to years. A
growing body of research has examined the association between physiological symp-
toms of IBD and the development of psychosocial difficulties. Specifically, it has been
noted that emotional symptoms including anxiety and depression occur more fre-
quently in individuals with IBD as compared to healthy peers (Greenley et al., 2010 ;
Mackner et al., 2006 ; Mikocka-Walus et al., 2016 ). This may be due in part to high rates
of maladaptive coping among individuals with IBD associated with poor disease out-comes and health-related quality of life (HRQoL; Danesh et al., 2015 ; Faust et al., 2012 ;
Freitas et al., 2015 ; Mikocka-Walus et al., 2016 ; van Tilburg et al., 2015 ). Given these
relations, researchers have begun to develop behavioral interventions that target the
psychosocial comorbidities associated with IBD in pursuit of improving HRQoL and dis-
ease outcomes.
Anxiety, depression, and associated factors in IBD
Recent research has pointed toward a heightened prevalence of anxiety and depres-sion in individuals diagnosed with IBD, reporting 19.1 –21.1% with anxiety and
21.2–25.5% with depression, compared to 9.6% with anxiety and 13.4% with depres-
sion in healthy controls (Byrne et al., 2017 ; Mackner et al., 2006 ; Mikocka-Walus et al.,
2016 ). The literature has also found higher rates of maladaptive coping in individuals
with IBD, that in turn are associated with greater anxiety and depression, decreased
quality of life (QoL), risk of active disease, and functional disability (Danesh et al.,
2015 ; Faust et al., 2012 ; Freitas et al., 2015 ; Mikocka-Walus, et al., 2016 ; van Tilburg
et al., 2015 ). Evidence further suggests that both maladaptive coping and depressive
symptoms partially explain the relations between stressors and abdominal-pain dis-
tress in IBD (Reed-Knight et al., 2018 ), as do anxiety and depression independently
(Mikocka-Walus et al., 2016 ).
A detailed review of additional factors associated with individual level of adjust-
ment among people suffering from IBD indicated several other constructs involved in
the etiology and maintenance of emotional difficulties (Jordan, Sin, Fear, & Chalder,
2016 ). These included gender (with females being at higher risk in some studies), per-
sonality variables (e.g. neuroticism), stress (i.e. perception of stress and coping strat-
egies), emotions (e.g. alexithymia; self-consciousness; active emotional control), and
maladaptive cognitions. The latter could be further subdivided into those cognitions
related to IBD (e.g. perception of stigma for disease; lack of social support; health
beliefs indicated severe outcomes) and more general cognitive errors likely to result to
maladjustment and/or emotional duress (e.g. hopelessness; negative self-concept). Thereview particularly noted that negative emotion focused methods of coping with
stress (i.e. avoidance or aggression) were particularly associated with negative106 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
outcomes in terms of psychological distress and HRQoL. Given these associations,
interventions targeting emotional symptoms in IBD have emphasized adaptive copingtechniques for improving anxiety and depression as well as related factors of disability,risk of disease activity, and HRQoL (Ballou & Keefer, 2017 ; Mikocka-Walus et al., 2015 ;
Yeh et al., 2017 ).
Health related quality of life (HRQoL)
The Centers for Disease Control (CDC) defines HRQoL as an individual ’s perceived psy-
chological and physical health status across time (Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 2000 ). Individuals with IBD report lower HRQoL than healthy individuals,
and those with comorbid anxiety or depression report lower HRQoL than those with-out these emotional comorbidities (Faust et al., 2012 ; Magalh ~aes et al., 2014 ). Impaired
HRQoL in chronic illnesses can have negative psychosocial and interpersonal correlateson the individual level such as less adaptive coping strategies (e.g. lack of cognitiverestructuring), poor body image, and poor relationships (Megari, 2013 ). From a societal
standpoint, HRQoL is measured by the CDC to identify groups experiencing impair-
ment and allocate effective public health programming aiming to prevent future dis-
ease or alleviate disease burden. Thus, impaired HRQoL is concerning not onlybecause of the individual burden associated with emotional duress, but also becauselower HRQoL in IBD has been linked with higher instance of emergency departmentvisits and hospitalization (Regueiro et al., 2016 ), and thus higher longitudinal costs for
sustained treatment. Given the associations between lower HRQoL, increased health-care utilization, and higher anxiety and depression in IBD populations, psychosocialtreatment studies in this population have targeted HRQoL as a related outcome
(Ballou & Keefer, 2017 ; Mikocka-Walus et al., 2015 ).
Disease activity
Disease activity is commonly studied as a factor related to emotional symptoms in IBD
due to the heightened prevalence of anxiety and depression during and/or immedi-
ately preceding active states of the disease (Mikocka-Walus et al., 2016 ). For example,
a recent study reported 66.4% of patients with active IBD vs. 28.2% of patients withinactive IBD indicated clinically significant anxiety symptoms, while 34.7% of patientswith active IBD vs. 19.9% of patients with inactive IBD indicated clinically significantdepressive symptoms (Mikocka-Walus et al., 2016 ). Additionally, active disease state is
cross-sectionally associated with a four-fold risk of anxiety and depression in adultpopulations (Byrne et al., 2017 ; Mackner et al., 2006 ). Greater anxiety severity and/or
depressed mood has also been associated with higher rates of relapse in terms of dis-
ease activity (Freitas et al., 2015 ; Mikocka-Walus, Pittet et al., 2016 ). The directionality
of this relationship is yet unclear, and future research elucidating the causes of thisassociation is warranted for treatment improvement.PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 107
Anxiety & depression treatment in IBD
There is great heterogeneity in the literature on treating anxiety and depression in
IBD. Intervention studies, including pilot studies and randomized controlled trials
(RCTs) targeting anxiety and depression in IBD, typically employ a wide range of meas-
ures and focus on a diverse array of outcome variables (Berrill et al., 2014 ; Reigada
et al., 2013 ; Schoultz et al., 2015 ; Thompson et al. 2012 ). Additionally, as noted by
Jordan, Ohlsen, Hayee, and Chalder ( 2018 ), the vast majority of existing trials have
been conducted in samples of individuals who exhibited only subclinical emotional
symptoms at treatment onset (thus potentially limiting the effects of intervention and
biasing overall interpretation of treatment efficacy). To further compound systematic
understanding of the extant literature, review studies have also been confounded by
high variability of therapeutic approaches implemented in previous research. Some
have classified disparate treatments as one broad category such as ‘psychotherapies ’
(Timmer et al., 2011 ; Yeh et al., 2017 ), whereas others have examined disparate treat-
ment types separately but noted limited evidence to recommend one intervention
type over another (Ballou & Keefer, 2017 ; Goodhand et al., 2009 ; Knowles et al., 2013 ;
McCombie et al., 2013 ; Von Wietersheim & Kessler, 2006 ). Examples of the heteroge-
neous set of interventions examined in the literature include Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy (CBT), Solution-Focused Therapy (SFT), mindfulness-based therapies, relax-
ation, hypnosis, and psychodynamic therapies (Ballou & Keefer, 2017 ; Goodhand et al.,
2009 ; Knowles et al., 2013 ; McCombie et al. 2013 ; Von Wietersheim & Kessler, 2006 ).
There is mixed evidence for each of these treatment modalities despite robust support
for the use of CBT, SFT, mindfulness, and relaxation for other chronic illness popula-
tions. Because of the lack of consensus for a superior treatment type, but some sup-
port for intervention more generally, aggregating the current evidence at the level of
individual treatment techniques may be advantageous.
Practice elements & the distillation and matching model
‘Practice element ’(PE), defined as an individual technique entailed in multi-component
interventions, is a term derived from the Distillation and Matching Model for evaluat-
ing large bodies of research findings (DMM; Chorpita & Daleiden, 2009 ). The DMM
considers PEs as the units of analyses to facilitate aggregation of findings across treat-
ment orientations. Chorpita and Daleiden ( 2009 ) applied the model across major men-
tal health diagnoses in children and adolescents and were able to produce practice
profiles linking evidentiary treatments to specific targets (irrespective of the theoretical
orientation or branding of any specific treatment package). To our knowledge, no lit-
erature has yet to examine health psychology interventions using this model. In a bur-
geoning field with numerous disparate theoretical and practical approaches to
treatment, understanding which individual techniques are associated with patient
improvement would be useful in the selection and implementation of clinical interven-
tions. Further, discerning individual PEs would potentially decrease some of the ambi-
guity in existing research between various theoretical approaches. As such, the
purpose of this review is to aggregate findings of existing studies examining the effi-
cacy of psychological treatment of anxiety and depression in IBD by analyzing PEs108 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
(criteria delineated below) across broad treatment types. The results are also presented
to facilitate clinical application, particularly in terms of informing readers of which PEsare most frequently associated with successful interventions.
Methods
Types of studies
Inclusion criteria were studies that (1) were published in a peer-reviewed journal as apaper or abstract with discernible eligibility criteria; (2) investigated the effect of a psy-chological intervention (i.e. the manipulation utilized at least one identified practice
element with an accessible description), on anxiety, depression, and/or coping (3)
were controlled evaluations of efficacy/effectiveness; (4) focused on populations withCD, UC, or combined UC and CD; (5) utilized group by time analyses or multi-levelmodeling equivalent; and (6) were written in English or Spanish. Among studies meet-
ing these criteria the exclusion criteria were 1) a complete lack of practice description
(i.e. no PEs could be discerned from the study ’s description) and 2) the reported data
were from the same intervention as another included paper. In the case of multiplepapers from the same intervention, the paper most relevant to the endpoints of thepresent review and most recent was considered the primary paper for inclusion and
all other study papers were used as supplements during data extraction. The end-
points of anxiety, depression, and/or coping were selected as inclusion criteria overHRQoL and disease activity. This was due to studies investigating the effect of anintervention solely on HRQoL and/or disease activity often not explicitly targeting anx-
iety and depressive symptoms (i.e. investigated the effect of a psychological interven-
tion on pain or fatigue regardless of anxiety or depression). These criteria wereselected to elucidate the highest caliber of evidence for treatment related to anxietyand depression in IBD, in lieu of including poorer quality designs and accounting for
study quality.
Search strategy
The primary investigator (KP), CK, and CH searched PSYCinfo, PubMed, Alt
HealthWatch, Cochrane Library, and ScienceDirect, using the following terms: psycho-social intervention IBD, CBT IBD, psychotherapy IBD, anxiety intervention IBD, depres-
sion intervention IBD, mindfulness intervention IBD, acceptance-based intervention
IBD. Within all databases, ‘peer-reviewed ’was selected for, within Cochrane Library,
‘embase ’was selected to reduce overlap with Pubmed, and finally within
ScienceDirect ‘research articles ’was selected to reduce irrelevant sources and because
selecting ‘peer-reviewed ’was not an option. Databases were searched through May
2019 with no specified start date. Other sources included additional records identifiedthrough previous reviews (found in database searching) and references offered by MGand MB. This search strategy was agreed upon by all authors, although no reviewprotocol was registered. These sources led to 1,363 records after duplicates were
removed, the titles and abstracts of which were reviewed for consistency with the
goals of the current study twice (once by KP, and once by CK or CH), to ensure rigor.PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 109
The final list resulted in 9 papers meeting inclusionary criteria, which are reviewed
here (see Figure 1 ).
Data extraction
For each article, data were sought for the following variables: population age, inter-
vention classification (CBT, mindfulness, SFT, etc.), and results of outcomes of interest
(i.e. anxiety, depression, coping, QoL, disease activity). Practice elements were alsoextracted and coded in accordance with the general structure of the DMM, which
relies on published descriptions of PEs for coding (cf., Chorpita et al., 2005 ; Chorpita &
Daleiden, 2009 ). PE coding was conducted independently by KP and CK, and any dis-
crepancies were resolved between the two and/or MG and MB. The PEs extracted in
the course of the present study that were previously described by the DMM include:
relaxation, cognitive (cognitive restructuring; here forth referred to as such), social
skills, attending (i.e. differential attention parent training), self-monitoring, relapse pre-
vention, problem solving, exposure, and assertiveness training (Chorpita & Daleiden,2009 ). Additionally, because the DMM has heretofore not been applied to health
psychology interventions, several codes for novel PEs not on the original list were also
delineated as necessary. This resulted in the definition of five new or adapted PEsrelated specifically to clinical techniques seen in IBD literature, including: education
(encompasses disease and/or psychoeducation delivered to any target; n ¼7 observa-
tions across all studies); mindfulness meditation (involving a specific focus on mindful
Figure 1. PRISMA flow diagram.110 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
awareness in meditation; n ¼2); goal setting (adapted to reflect planned activities to
improve mental and/or physical health, including healthy dietary and physical activ-ities; n ¼2), hypnotherapy (hypnosis used to target symptoms of anxiety, abdominal
pain, and/or immune functioning; n ¼2); distraction (direction of the patient ’s atten-
tion away from the pain/symptoms); biofeedback (the use of biotechnology to demon-
strate physiological arousal levels and ‘gameify ’the reduction of these levels utilizing
concurrent techniques; n ¼1) and stress management (identification of various stres-
sor types and corresponding tactics; n ¼1. One additional study described the use of
stress management, however it was referred to as an overarching approach (i.e. bro-ken down into other PEs) rather than a PE itself; Thus, in this instance stress manage-ment was classified as the intervention approach rather than a PE so as not to notduplicate the same technique in multiple categories.
Data analysis
Similarly, data analysis was influenced by DMM methodology, which used frequencypatterns evaluated with rigorous statistical methods (Chorpita & Daleiden, 2009 ). Due
to the current small volume of evidence investigating interventions for anxiety and
depression within IBD, this more detailed statistical method was not appropriate for
the present review. Thus, the PEs from the studies reviewed are described and aggre-gated based on frequency of use alone. Separate PE frequency charts were generatedfor (1) all active interventions described in the included studies; (2) all interventionsthat produced evidence in the form of performing significantly better than one ormore comparison groups over time (referred to as ‘successful ’interventions); and (3)
successful interventions within individual outcome domains (i.e. anxiety; depression;QoL; disease activity).
Results
Of included studies (n ¼9), 6 were conducted with samples of adults alone (age /C21
18), 1 with adolescents alone (ages 11 –17), 1 with younger children (ages 8 –10) and
adolsecents, and 1 with all three age groups. For additional information on the sample
criteria and study design for included studies, see Table 1 . The broad intervention clas-
sifications described in these papers were as follows: CBT (n ¼5); relaxation (n ¼1);
mindfulness-based (n ¼2); and stress-management (n ¼1). Extracted practice elements
were as follows: education, cognitive restructuring, self-monitoring, relaxation, hypno-therapy; social skills, distraction, differential attention, assertiveness training, exposure,goal setting, problem solving, mindfulness meditation, stress management, and bio-feedback. For additional treatment characteristics, see Table 2 . Across all studies, fre-
quency data indicated that relaxation and education were the most commonly
implemented techniques, followed by cognitive restructuring, distraction, and social
skills ( Figure 2 ). The following studies were identified as successful interventions
because results demonstrated significant group-by-time differences in one or morevariables of interest, with one group demonstrating greater improvement(s): SchoultzPSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 111
Table 1. Study designs.
StudySample
sizeAge
Mean(SD)Age
rangeIBD
type(s) Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteriaComparison
condition
Mikocka-Walus
et al. ( 2017 );
Some dataobtainedfrom earlier paperon same study:Mikocka-Waluset al. ( 2015 )CBT
(N¼90)
SC(N¼84)Total
sample:46.5 (15.7)/C2118 y.o. All types 1. Clinically established diagnosis
of IBD
2. Current clinical remission
or mild symptoms only for at least3 months,
3. Sufficient English
to answer questionnaires,
4. 18 y.o. or greater5. Competence to consent
6. Willingness
to complete CBT sessions1. Diagnosis of substance dependence
or serious mental illness
2. Currently in psychotherapy3. Significant cognitive impairmentStandard
care (SC)
Thompson
et al. ( 2012 )PASCET-PI
(N¼22)
TAU(N¼19)PASCET-PI
15.0 (2.3)
TAU15.1 (1.8)11–17 y.o. All types 1. 11 –17 y.o.
2. Biopsy-confirmed IBD diagnosis3. Children ’s Depression
Inventory Score >¼9 on child-
or parent-reported version
4. English speaking1. Current major depressive, dysthymic,
bipolar, psychotic, or substance usedisorder by DSM-IV criteria
2. Antidepressant medications within
2 weeks of assessment
3. Substance use disorder or
suicide attempt within 1 month
of enrollment
4. Depression requiring psychiatric
hospitalization
5. Failure of previous manual-based
CBT of at least 8 sessionsTreatment as
usual (TAU)
Schoultz
et al. ( 2015 )MBCT
(N¼22)
WC(N¼22)MBCT 48.59
(12.05)
WC49.68 (15.37)/C2118 y.o. Crohn ’s
disease or
ulcertivecolitis1. Sufficient English
2. Able to give informed consent3. Age of 18 or older 4) Diagnosis of
Crohn ’s disease or ulcerative colitis
confirmed by clinician
4. Ability to do light exercise5. Ability to attend the eight sessions
and commit to up tp 45 minutes ofdaily home practice
6. No recent change in antidepressants7. Remission of symptoms1. Major psychiatric illness
or alcohol dependency
2. Were scheduled for surgery
during the study period
3. Already participating in other
pharmacological or psychologicalintervention study
4. Recent prescriptions
of antidepressants
5. Exacerbation of symptomsWaitlist
control (WC)
Jedel et al. (2014) MBSR
(N¼27)
Control
(N¼28)MBSR
46.04 (12.8)Control
39.68 (11.06)18–70 y.o. Ulcerative
colitis1. Documented moderate UC
2. Inactive UC3. One or more flares in previous
6 months
4. Colonic involvement of >15 cm from
the anal verge
5. Age 18 –701. History of colon resection
2. Antibiotic use within
previous 30 days
3. Antidiarrheal medication use
within previous 7 days
4. Use of non-allowed medicationTime/Attention
control
(continued )112 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Table 1. Continued.
StudySample
sizeAge
Mean(SD)Age
rangeIBD
type(s) Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteriaComparison
condition
6. No IBD medication
or on a stable dose
7. Willingness to complete
an 8-week course5. Unresolved history of abuse, current
or past dissociative disorder, PTSD,psychosis, hospitalization for self-harm/SI
6. Resistance to intervention due
to religious beliefs
7. Current pregnancy lactation
8. Prior mind
body intervention training
9. Current chronic disorders
Levy et al. ( 2016 ) SLCBT
(N¼91)
ES(N¼94)Total sample
13.5 (2.7)8–17 y.o. Crohn ’s
disease orulcertivecolitis1. 8 –17 y.o.
2. 3 þmonths post-diagnosis
of Crohn ’s or UC diagnosis
3. Lived with participating caregiver
for 3þmonths
4. Willing, able, and agreed
to particpate in the interventionand complete questionnaires
5. Medically approved to engage
in normal activities1. Chronic disease other than epilepsy
2. Major surgery within the past
year unrelated to IBD
3. Developmental disabilities requiring
full-time special education or
impairing ability to communicate
4. Non-English speakingEducation
support (ES)
Mizrahi
et al. ( 2012 )Treatment
(N¼18)
WC(N¼21)Total
sample
35.56(13.38)/C2118 y.o. All types 1. Confirmed diagnosis of IBD
for 6þmonths
2.>18 y.o.
3. Active disease according to
Disease Activity Questionnaire
4. Provided informed consent5. Fluent in Hebrew language1. Expected surgery in the
following two months
2. Diagnosed as suffering from
an active psychosis or from active
major depression
3. Undergoing
psycho-pharmacotherapy
4. Participating in
another research study
5. Acquainted with and
already practicingrelaxation techniquesWaitlist
control (WC)
McCombie
et al. ( 2015 )CCBT
(N¼113)
TAU(N¼86)CCBT
38.3 (12.8)
TAU
39.6 (11.8)18–65 y.o. All types 1. 18 –65 y.o.
2. Diagnosed with IBD
3. Sufficient English4. Willing to participate
in the intervention and answerquestionnaires1. Disease too severe (recent
major surgery or
complicated disease)
2. Diagnosis of psychotic disorder3. Receiving any psychological
intervention
4. Those with an ileostomy
or colostomyTreatment as
usual (TAU)
(continued )PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 113
Table 1. Continued.
StudySample
sizeAge
Mean(SD)Age
rangeIBD
type(s) Inclusion criteria Exclusion criteriaComparison
condition
Schwarz and
Blanchard ( 1991 )Treatment (N ¼11)
Treated control (N ¼10)Treatment 45.3 (11.9)
Treated control42.3 (13.4)/C2118 y.o. All types 1. >¼18 y.o.
2. Diagnosis of
IBD by personal physician1. Meet criteria for DSM-III-
R major depressive disorder,bipolar disorder, or schizophreniaSelf-monitoring
treated control
Stapersma
et al. ( 2018 )–
PE’s in Szigethy
et al. ( 2007 )CBT
(N¼37)
Control
(N¼33)CBT
18.62 (4.27)Control
17.69 (4.82)10–25 y.o. All types 1. 10 –25 y.o.
2. Confirmed diagnoses of IBD
(UC, CD, or IBD-unclassified)
3. Subclinical symptoms of
anxiety and/or depression1. Intellectual disability
2. Current pharmacological
or psychological treatment for
mental health problems
3. Insufficient mastery
of Dutch language
4. Diagnosis of selective mutism,
bipolar disorder, schizophrenia/psychotic disorder, autism spectrumdisorders, obsessive-compulsivedisorder, posttraumatic or acutestress-disorder, or substance
use disorder
5. 8 þsessions of CBT in past year
6. Participating in
another interventional studyCare as usual114 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Table 2. Treatment characteristics.
Study Delivery mode Number of sessionsFrequency
of sessionsLength
of sessionTreatment
family Included PEs
Mikocka-Walus
et al. ( 2017 )–
Some dataobtained fromearlier paper
on same study:
Mikocka-Waluset al. ( 2015 )Participants choice:
Face to face (F2F,
n¼22) or Online
(n¼68)10 F2F: 1/week, Online:
Self-directed2 hours CBT Education, Cognitive, Relaxation
Techniques, Social Skills,
Distraction, AssertivenessTraining, Exposure
Thompson
et al. ( 2012 )Predominantly face
to face, with no
more than3 sessions deliveredvia telephone9–11 individual
youth sessions,
3 parent sessions1/week 1 hour CBT Education, Cognitive, Relaxation,
Hypnotherapy, Goal Setting,
Problem Solving
Schoultz et al. ( 2015 ) Face-to-face 8 sessions 1/week 2 hours Mindfulness-based
cognitive therapyEducation, Cognitive,
Mindfulness Meditation
Jedel et al. (2014) Face-to-face 8 sessions 1/week 2 –2.5 hours Mindfulness-based
stress reductionEducation, Mindfulness Meditation
Levy et al. ( 2016 ) Face-to-face 3 sessions 1/week Mean length ¼
70 minutes ± 14.31CBT Cognitive, Relaxation, Attending
(Parent Training),Stress Management
Mizrahi et al. ( 2012 ) Face-to-face 3 sessions 1/2 weeks 50 minutes Relaxation Self-Monitoring, Relaxation
McCombie et al. ( 2015 ) Self-administered on
computer viaMedMoodle8 sessions 1/week Not specified/self-
directedCBT Education, Cognitive, Relaxation,
Social Skills, Distraction,Assertiveness Training, Exposure
Schwarz and
Blanchard ( 1991 )Face-to-face 12 sesions 2/week for first 4 weeks,
1/week for second
four weeks60 minutes Stress
managementEducation, Self-Monitoring,
Relaxation, Biofeedback
Stapersma
et al. ( 2018 )–
PE’s in Szigethy
et al. ( 2007 )Individual sessions:
6 face-to-face sessions,
7 via phone, family
sessions: 3 face-to-face sessions13 individual
sessions, 3 family
sessions (for those
<20 years old)1/week for first
ten weeks,
1/month for
following 3 monthsFace-to-face ¼
60 min,
phone ¼30 minCBT Education, Cognitive, Relaxation,
Hypnotherapy, Social Skills,
Distraction, Goal Setting,
Problem SolvingPSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 115
et al., 2015 ; Jedel et al., 2014; Levy et al., 2016 ; Mizrahi et al., 2012 ; Schwarz &
Blanchard, 1991 . For a summary of included studies ’results, see Table 3 .
The PE profile for successful interventions, however, exhibited some differences in
comparison to the overall aggregate. Relaxation again accompanied education as themost frequently employed PEs, followed by cognitive restructuring, and then by mind-
fulness meditation and self-monitoring ( Figure 3 ). PEs in treatments with significant
group by time differences specific to psychosocial outcomes (HRQoL, Anxiety,
Depression, and/or Coping; n ¼5) were grouped together because there were few
interventions examining these outcomes independently. The PE frequencies for theseinterventions were similar, with cognitive restructuring now accompanying relaxation
and education as most frequent, followed by mindfulness meditation ( Figure 4 ). A PE
figure for Disease Activity was not generated because so few studies showed signifi-cant group by time improvement in this variable (n ¼2).
To further characterize successful interventions, follow-up descriptive statistics of
central tendency were run for the number of PEs employed in all included interven-
tions, successful interventions, and remaining interventions. These results indicatedthat successful interventions utilized fewer PEs overall (M ¼3.67, Median ¼3.5), than
non-successful interventions (M ¼7, Median ¼7.5), and all studies included (M ¼4.78,
Median ¼4).
Figure 2. PE profile for included interventions (n ¼9)./C3Refer to data extraction methods for add-
itional details.116 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Table 3. Study results.
Study citation Outcomes & measures Main findings LimitationsClassification
of‘Successful ’
(Y/N)
Mikocka-Walus
et al. ( 2017 )–
Some data
obtained fromearlier paperon same
study: Mikocka-
Walus et al.(2015 )Quality of life
Short-Form 36 Health
Questionnaire (SF-36)
Disease activity
Crohn ’s Disease Activity Index (CDAI),
Simple Clinical Colitis Activity Index
(SCCAI)
Anxiety
State Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI)
Depression
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
(HADS)Stress
Revised Social Readjustment Rating
Scale (RSRRS)
Coping
Brief Coping Operations Preference
Enquiry (Brief COPE), IBD Stages of
Change Coping Questionnaire (IBDSCCQ)
Biomarkers
C-Reactive Protein, Hemoglobin,
Platelets, White Cell CountNo significant multivariate effects of CBT on
disease activity, anxiety, depression, coping,
or biomarkers at 6, 12, or 24 months.
An exploratory sub-analysis of participants inneed [defined as those who recentlytransitioned from pediatric care (18 –20 yo);
CDAI>180 or SCCAI >5; poor coping, and/
or high anxiety or depression] at 6 monthsrevealed significant improvement in HADSscores which disappeared at 12 months.Attrition at 12 months was high overall
(39%).
Attrition was significantly higher in the
CBT group vs standard care ( p<.001,
53% vs 24% respectively) and in theonline vs in-person CBT option ( p¼.02,
60% vs 32% respectively).N
Thompson
et al. ( 2012 )Depression
Children ’s Depression Inventory, Child
Report (CDI-C) and Parent-Report (CDI-P)Global/Adaptive functioning
Children ’s Global Functioning ScaleNon-significant trends toward greater reduction
in depressive symptoms (child and parent-report) at 12-month follow upSignificantly greater improvement in global
functioning (adaptive functioning) in the
intervention group than the control.Limited sample size
Overall attritionGreater attrition in minority participants,Potential ceiling effect for depressive
symptoms owing to exclusion of those
with clinical depressionN
Schoultz
et al. ( 2015 )Anxiety
STAI
Depression
Beck Depression Inventory II (BDI-II)
Disease activity
CDAI, SCCAI
Disease-related quality of lifeNo significant changes in state anxiety, disease
activity, or QOL.
There was a significant group x time
interaction for depression and trait anxiety.44% attrition in both groups
Difficulty of assessing use of at home
practice
Lack of assessment of medicationchanges throughout interventionY
(continued )PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 117
Table 3. Continued.
Study citation Outcomes & measures Main findings LimitationsClassification
of‘Successful ’
(Y/N)
Inflammatory Bowel Disease
Questionnaire (IBDQ)
Jedel et al.
(2014)Disease-related quality of life
IBDQ
Depression
BDI-II
Anxiety
STAI
Mindfulness
Mindful Attention Awareness Scale
(MAAS)
Disease status
Mayo UC-DAI Disease Activity, Rectal
Bleeding Score, Sigmoidoscopy),Inflammation (Stool Calpotectin Levels,
Interleukin-6, -8, and -10),
Stress
Serum adrenocorticotropic hormone
(ACTH), urinary cortisol, Perceived-Stress
Questionnaire (PSQ)
Perceived health competence
Perceived Health Competence ScaleThey found significantly better QOL among
flared participants in the treatment group,
compared to flared subjects in the controlgroup, as measured by the IBD-Q Total Scaleand the bowel and emotion subscales.
There were no differences between MBSR
subjects who flared and control subjects whoflared on measures of depression, anxietymindfulness, perceived health competence,
relapse rates or stool calprotectin.Small sample size
Could not investigate role of medication
on outcomesAge difference in groupsPotential influence of disease activity on
assessments in those who flaredY
Levy et al.
(2016 )IBD-Specific quality of life
IMPACT-III
Anxiety
Multidimensional Anxiety Scale for
Children (MASC)
Coping skills
Pain Response Inventory (PRI), Pain
Beliefs Questionnaire (PBQ), Adults ’
Responses to Children ’s Symptoms (ARCS)
Depression
CDI-C and CDI-P
Disease activity
Pediatric Crohn ’s Disease/UlcerativeSignificant differences in CDI, IMPACT and PRI
(child-reported), missed school days, child
problem-focused coping (Adult reported)Non significant findings for PRI (parentreport), child problem focused coping (child-
reported), emotion focused coping (PBQ), FDI,
MASC, or hospital daysStudy sample predominantly white,
Parent sample comprised largely of
mothers,Participants predominantly had inactivedisease statesY
(continued )118 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Table 3. Continued.
Study citation Outcomes & measures Main findings LimitationsClassification
of‘Successful ’
(Y/N)
Colitis Activity Index (PCDAI/PUCAI)
Other
Functional Disability Inventory (FDI),
Hospital Days, Missed School Days,
Mizrahi
et al. ( 2012 )Disease-related quality of life
IBDQ
Anxiety
STAI
Stress, depression and mood
Visual Analogue Scale (VAS)Significant differences in IBDQ, anxiety (STAI),
mood & stress (VAS)No significant difference in Depression (VAS)Non-blinded study
Small sample sizeWaitlist rather than attention control
Lack of long-term follow-upY
McCombie
et al. ( 2015 )HRQOL
Short Form 12 Health Questionnaire
(SF-12)Anxiety and depression
HADS
Stress
Perceived stress scale (PSS-10),
Coping
Brief COPE
Crohn ’s disease activity
Harvey Bradshaw IndexUC or IBD-unspecified disease activity
SCCAI
Other
Social Functioning Questionnaire (SFQ),
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire- BriefVersion (EPQ-BV)Significant improvement in HRQOL (SF-12) for
those who complete at least 50% of studyParticipants were not blinded
Lack of statistical power
Low adherenceTime singe diagnosis not recordedUnknown if some participants began
psychiatric treatment outside the
boundaries of the studyY
Schwarz and
Blanchard ( 1991 )Depression
BDI-II
Anxiety
STAI
Somatic symptoms
Psychosomatic Symptom Checklist
(PSC)StressSignificant group by time difference in diarrhea
and urge to defecate such that the groupthat only self-monitored symptoms showedgreater improvement than group that also
utilized relaxation and biofeedback skills.Low sample size,
Disproportionate representation of UC vsCD in each treatment groupY
(continued )PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 119
Table 3. Continued.
Study citation Outcomes & measures Main findings LimitationsClassification
of‘Successful ’
(Y/N)
IBD Stress Index, Hassles Scale, Life
Events Scale
Stapersma
et al. ( 2018 )–
PE’s in Szigethy
et al. ( 2007 )Anxiety
Screen for Child Anxiety Related
Disorders (SCARED; 10 –20 y.o.), HADS
(21 –25 y.o.),
Depression
CDI (10 –17 y.o.), BDI-II (18 –25 y.o.),
HRQoL
IMPACT-III (10 –20 y.o.), IBDQ
(21 –25 y.o.)
Disease activity
PCDAI or PUCAI (10 –20 y.o.), CDAI or
partial Mayo score (21 –25 y.o.)No findings showed significant group by
time changesStatistical limitation of utilizing different
instruments across the age spectrum of
the study,Small sample sizeN120 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Finally, modal PEs were examined, with frequency statistics showing the modal PE
to be relaxation and education for all included interventions (78% each), all successfulinterventions (67% each), and interventions successful for psychosocial outcomes(60%). Ties for modal PEs and next-most frequently utilized PEs, however, were notquite as consistent between these groups. Cognitive restructuring was second-mostfrequent for all included interventions (67%), second-most frequent for all successfulinterventions (50%), and then accompanied relaxation and education as modal for
interventions successful for psycho-social outcomes (60%). Similarly, mindfulness medi-
tation and self-monitoring were more featured in successful PE profiles than the over-all aggregate. Mindfulness meditation was used in 22% of all included interventions,33% of all successful interventions, and 40% of interventions successful for psycho-social outcomes and ranked as second most-frequent for this group. Interestingly, self-monitoring was comparatively most featured in all successful interventions (33%), asopposed to all included interventions (22%) or interventions successful for psycho-social outcomes (20%). In total, among the entire set of all included interventions,relaxation and education (78%) were modal with only cognitive restructuring as a clearrunner-up; however, when considering only interventions successful for psychosocialoutcomes, all three of these PEs became modal (each at 60%), and mindfulness medi-
tation (33%) became evident as the clear runner-up.
Discussion
The present study examined PE Profiles of effective interventions for anxiety and
depression in IBD. Practice Element profiles reflect the great heterogeneity of this bur-geoning literature, while simultaneously offering a new perspective on the content ofsuccessful interventions (as defined in the methods). For example, profiles were verysimilar for all successful interventions vs. psychosocial-specific successful interventions,yet distinct from the profile of all PEs studied. Although relaxation, education, and
cognitive restructuring were the top three for each profile, successful interventions
more frequently utilized mindfulness meditation and self-monitoring next, while in allincluded studies, distraction and social skills were next most frequent.
Modal practice elements
It is perhaps unsurprising that the Cognitive Behavioral techniques of cognitiverestructuring was more frequent in interventions effective for psychosocial outcomesthan those improving any outcome more broadly. It is noteworthy, however, thatother traditional Cognitive Behavioral PEs of self-monitoring and exposure were notprominently featured in these treatment approaches. This stands in contrast to the lit-
erature examining CBT more broadly, which heavily emphasizes the combination of
techniques such as self-monitoring, cognitive restructuring, and exposure in the trad-itional treatment of emotional disorders. This difference may result from a differentialcombination of PEs being more appropriate to the treatment of anxiety and depres-sion in IBD. Given the close association between anxiety, depression, and disease activ-ity, it is possible that techniques or combinations of techniques simultaneouslyPSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 121
targeting physiological aspects and affect dysregulation would be more effective.
Subsequently, the combination of physiologically quieting PEs like relaxation and
mindfulness meditation with cognitive restructuring techniques may have a positiveimpact on both anxiety or depression and disease symptoms (as opposed to solely
cognitive/behavioral adaptations in response to these symptoms). This notion may be
supported by a disparity showing up in the use of mindfulness meditation (22% in allincluded studies vs 40% in interventions with psychosocial success). This is consistentwith the results of Yeh et al. ( 2017 ), who conducted a review of mind-body interven-
tions for anxiety and depression in IBD and concluded that relaxation and mindful-
ness-based interventions may improve psychological functioning in adults with IBD(particularly those with high stress and concurrent IBS symptoms). Further, among suc-
cessful interventions, cognitive restructuring was always utilized in combination with
at least relaxation, mindfulness, or both. Thus, combining cognitive restructuring withone of these elements seems particularly salient for IBD populations.
Although it is possible that traditional CBT PEs such as self-monitoring and expos-
ure were simply not well described within included studies, relying on published
descriptions is the most empirical method of extracting PEs as it limits bias introduced
Figure 3. PE profile for successful interventions, any outcome (n ¼6)./C3Refer to data extraction
methods for additional details.122 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
by post-hoc descriptions of PEs. Combining this method with double coding and
resolving discrepancies, our methods limit the impact of biased PE descriptions onthese results. Further, although the PE of goal setting is typically considered a trad-itional component of CBT, our study specifically examined goal setting in the context
of health behaviors such as diet and physical activity. Thus, we may have seen lower
rates than expected for this PE, not because of the same reasons as self-monitoringand exposure, but because this PE may be better fitted for psychosocial interventionsfor adherence/compliance within IBD rather than for anxiety and depression. The trad-itional idea of goal setting within CBT is often accomplished through homework andcollaborative goal setting. While many of these interventions described homework, col-laborative goal setting was not described. Thus, homework was conceptualized as anintegrated part of other PEs, such that there was homework specific to each of relax-ation, self-monitoring, cognitive restructuring, etc.
For mindfulness meditation and relaxation, successful combinations demonstrated
less ubiquity. Like cognitive restructuring, relaxation was most often used in combin-ation with at least mindfulness, cognitive restructuring, or both, and mindfulness wasused once in combination with at least relaxation, cognitive restructuring, or bothamong successful interventions. However, in two successful studies, cognitive restruc-turing was not utilized at all, and mindfulness or relaxation was utilized successfully in
Figure 4. PE profile for successful interventions, psychosocial outcomes (n ¼5)./C3Refer to data
extraction methods for additional details.PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 123
combination with only one other PE. Mindfulness was in combination with only educa-
tion in an intervention yielding group by time improvement in emotional and physicalHRQOL. Relaxation was used in combination with only self-monitoring in an interven-tion resulting in significant group by time improvement in disease activity. Thissuggests prioritizing the inclusion of physiologically quieting interventions for psycho-
logical services in IBD, and perhaps prioritizing mindfulness meditation for psycho-
social outcomes. Given that this generalization is based only on singular cases,however, it awaits further replication before being strongly supported as an overallchange to clinical intervention more broadly. Additionally, it is important to considerthe influence of the number of PEs utilized in these cases (2 PEs for each study) andwhether this enhanced efficacy via increasing acceptability for patients.
The number of elements utilized across all observations should also be considered
when interpreting the finding of education, relaxation, cognitive restructuring, andmindfulness as the top PEs utilized with success. In addition to the aforementionedcases utilizing only 2 PEs with success, these observations were supported by the dis-parity of elements used between successful and not successful interventions. Themean (M ¼3.67) and median (3) number of PEs included for successful interventions
were lower than those that were not successful (M ¼5.75, median ¼6.5). These find-
ings, combined with the differential PE profiles, may suggest that focusing on three or
less of the top four PEs (education, relaxation, cognitive restructuring, and mindfulness
meditation —perhaps prioritizing the inclusion of at least one of relaxation or mindful-
ness meditation) and putting little to no focus on additional PEs would increase effect-iveness of interventions for psychosocial outcomes in IBD.
Treatment group vs. practice elements
Many previous review studies lacked consensus in recommending one treatmentgroup over another, and the current findings shed light as to why that may havebeen the case. First, the PEs with the highest frequencies in successful treatmentswere often nested within separate specific approaches (e.g. relaxation from relaxationprograms; mindfulness from mindfulness meditation programs; cognitive restructuringfrom cognitive-behavioral programs). Second, the disparity in number of PEs utilized
and variability in PE combinations utilized even between successful interventions rep-
resents variance in treatment outcome unaccounted for by treatment content alone.However, the totality of extraneous factors may not always be feasibly controlled, nei-ther experimentally nor statistically. To do so in the course of even a single study canbe difficult, but when considering an entire body of literature, it becomes exponen-tially more so. These difficulties are compounded when the literature is limited in thenumber of studies given novelty of inquiry in the area (i.e. meta-analytic approachescannot be applied, and other methods of statistical aggregation are similarly limited).
Thus, many of the variables that could be entailed in the ‘extraneous factors ’part of
efficacious treatment has yet to be illuminated. The PE profiles and descriptive statis-tics produced in the current study represent the psychosocial content that one cancontrol, implement, and disseminate, and have utility both in elucidating potential124 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
foundational techniques for psychosocial treatment of IBD and illuminating currently
unknown factors affecting treatment outcome.
Limitations and future directions: potential factors affecting outcome
Factors influencing variability in treatment outcome are numerous and raise questions
about the feasibility of experimentally or statistically controlling for their influence. In
terms of treatment factors, the length of intervention and/or contact hours, providerof intervention (i.e. nurse, psychologist, etc.), individual vs. group format, and timingof post-treatment assessments could all affect outcomes. The order and combinationof PEs could also influence outcomes (i.e. dependent, additive effects of PEs deliveredsequentially), as could discrepancies in labeling PEs (i.e. one study described theirpractice element as stress management, and this term could not be further brokendown, whereas other studies described multiple PEs like relaxation and cognitiverestructuring as making up a stress management approach). In terms of patient fac-tors, differing inclusion criteria (e.g. age; those with clinically elevated anxiety and/ordepression symptoms; those with elevated disease activity; individuals in remission or
with comorbid IBS; etc.) could also affect outcomes, which has been noted by more
recent reviews (Yeh et al., 2017 ). Additionally, separating analyses for treatment of anx-
iety vs. depression in IBD will eventually be necessary as work in this area continuesto advance, as will research illuminating stress-related symptoms (i.e. distress due tofatigue, pain, weight loss, or social sequelae). The present study did not account forthese differences, partially due to the limited literature and wide variety of inclusioncriteria and post-assessment time frames utilized across interventions. Owing to theseissues, the present study was limited by the number of included studies and scope offrequency and descriptive analyses. Future research investigating the influence ofthese factors on intervention efficacy is warranted.
Clinical implications
In spite of these limitations, the current findings may have important implications forclinical practice. Our finding that education (about the impact of IBD on both physi-ology and emotional symptoms) and relaxation were most prominent across successfulinterventions in participants across the lifespan offers some support for their applica-tion as a front-line intervention in the medical setting. Relaxation techniques anddeep breathing require minimal teaching time and can be delivered by a wide varietyof professionals including social workers, psychologists, or nurses. Mindfulness medita-tion and cognitive restructuring may also serve as effective first line treatments, giventheir prevalence in successful interventions for psychosocial outcomes, and they
exhibit similar ease of training and adaptability in methods of implementation.
Beyond these foundational techniques, our findings also point to implementation ofself-monitoring. However, our findings also point toward the importance of carefullycombining techniques to minimize PEs utilized to improve outcomes, with successfulinterventions suggesting the use of 3 –4 of the following: relaxation, education, cogni-
tive restructuring, and mindfulness meditation. Although the current findings do notPSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 125
directly inform necessity or sequencing of these techniques, it is possible that more
heavily cognitive PEs would be best applied after physiological quieting techniques orreductions in disease activity were achieved. Further research on the context,sequence, and optimal delivery methods of specific PEs in IBD treatment is necessary,and developing evidentiary guidelines for such considerations will be helpful in direct-
ing clinical resources and facilitating access to evidence-based care.
Summary
In conclusion, the current study found that effective psychological treatments of anx-iety and depression in IBD most frequently employ education, relaxation, cognitive
restructuring, and mindfulness techniques, consistent with a more recent reviewisolating studies employing physiologically calming techniques of relaxation and mind-fulness. Effective treatments may also be characterized by the inclusion of self-moni-toring and the use of fewer total practice elements. Although limited by the small thenumber of studies and scope of descriptive and frequency analyses, these results con-tribute to the understanding of how treatment content may influence outcome. Thisrepresents a step forward from the previously reported ambiguity over the advantage
of one psychological treatment type over another for improving anxiety and depres-
sion in IBD. Future research examining additional factors related to treatment outcomeother than treatment content are warranted. The clinical significance of the presentresults is indicated by their support of relaxation and education as potential first-linetreatments of comorbid anxiety and depression while disease activity is treated, withthe employment of additional cognitive and mindfulness techniques perhaps bestsuited for when anxiety and/or depression persist even beyond a reduction in diseaseactivity. Thus, anxiety and depression may be successfully treated with evidence-based
psychological treatment that prioritizes elements of relaxation and education before
employing traditional cognitive behavioral techniques.
Disclosure statement
We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication
and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced itsoutcome. We confirm that the manuscript has been read and approved by all named authorsand that there are no other persons who satisfied the criteria for authorship but are not listed.
We further confirm that the order of authors listed in the manuscript has been approved by all
of us. We confirm that we have given due consideration to the protection of intellectual prop-erty associated with this work and that there are no impediments to publication, including thetiming of publication, with respect to intellectual property. In so doing we confirm that we havefollowed the regulations of our institutions concerning intellectual property. We understand thatthe Corresponding Author is the sole contact for the Editorial process (including EditorialManager and direct communications with the office). He/she is responsible for communicating
with the other authors about progress, submissions of revisions and final approval of proofs. We
confirm that we have provided a current, correct email address which is accessible by theCorresponding Author and which has been configured to accept email from ( kprender@
uab.edu ).126 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Funding
KLP was supported by the University of Alabama at Birmingham Center for Clinical and
Translational Science under grant TL1TR001418 and the University of Alabama at BirminghamNutrition Obesity Research Center pre-doctoral fellowship funded through the NIH T32 grant
(T32HL105349) awarded by the Heart, Lung and Blood Disease Institute (NHLBI). MAG was sup-
ported by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality/University of Alabama at BirminghamK12 in Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Program under grant K12HS023009. This work hasbeen supported in part by funding awarded to MJB from The University of Alabama atBirmingham Nutrition and Obesity Research Center Pilot and Feasibility Program under grantDK056336 and the Kaul Pediatric Research Institute (no grant number assigned).
ORCID
Kathryn L. Prendergast http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8055-6986
Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author,KP, upon reasonable request.
Summary
The present systematic review suggests clinical techniques of relaxation, cognitive restructuring,education, and mindfulness meditation are most frequently successful in treating anxiety anddepression in IBD.
Included studies
Levy, R. L., Van Tilburg, M. A., Langer, S. L., Romano, J. M., Walker, L. S., Mancl, L. A., Murphy,
T. B., Claar, R. L., Feld, S. I., Christie, D. L., & Abdullah, B. (2016). Effects of a cognitive behav-ioral therapy intervention trial to improve disease outcomes in children with inflammatorybowel disease. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,22(9), 2134 –2148.
McCombie, A., Gearry, R., Andrews, J., Mulder, R., & Mikocka-Walus, A. (2015). Does computerized
cognitive behavioral therapy help people with inflammatory bowel disease? A randomized
controlled trial. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,22(1), 171 –181.
Mikocka-Walus, A., Bampton, P., Hetzel, D., Hughes, P., Esterman, A., & Andrews, J. M. (2017).
Cognitive-behavioural therapy for inflammatory bowel disease: 24-month data from a rando-mised controlled trial. International Journal of Behavioral Medicine ,24(1), 127 –135. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12529-016-9580-9
Mizrahi, M. C., Reicher-Atir, R., Levy, S., Haramati, S., Wengrower, D., Israeli, E., & Goldin, E. (2012).
Effects of guided imagery with relaxation training on anxiety and quality of life amongpatients with inflammatory bowel disease. Psychology & Health ,27(12), 1463 –1479.
Schoultz, M., Atherton, I., & Watson, A. (2015). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for inflam-
matory bowel disease patients: Findings from an exploratory pilot randomised controlled trial.
Trials ,16(1), 379 https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-015-0909-5
Schwarz, S. P., & Blanchard, E. B. (1991). Evaluation of a psychological treatment for inflamma-
tory bowel disease. Behaviour Research and Therapy ,29(2), 167 –177. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0005-7967(91)90045-5
Stapersma, L., van den Brink, G., van der Ende, J., Szigethy, E. M., Beukers, R., Korpershoek, T. A.,
Theuns-Valks, S. D. M., Hillegers, M. H. J., Escher, J. C., & Utens, E. M. W. J. (2018). EffectivenessPSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 127
of disease-specific cognitive behavioral therapy on anxiety, depression, and quality of life in
youth with inflammatory bowel disease: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Pediatric
Psychology ,43(9), 967 –980. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpepsy/jsy029
Thompson, R. D., Craig, A., Crawford, E. A., Fairclough, D., Gonzalez-Heydrich, J., Bousvaros, A.,
Noll, R. B., DeMaso, D. R., & Szigethy, E. (2012). Longitudinal results of cognitive behavioraltreatment for youths with inflammatory bowel disease and depressive symptoms. Journal of
Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings ,19(3), 329 –337. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10880-012-
9301-8
References
Ballou, S., & Keefer, L. (2017). Psychological interventions for irritable bowel syndrome and
inflammatory bowel diseases. Clinical and Translational Gastroenterology ,8(1), e214. https://
doi.org/10.1038/ctg.2016.69
Berrill, J. W., Sadlier, M., Hood, K., & Green, J. T. (2014). Mindfulness-based therapy for inflamma-
tory bowel disease patients with functional abdominal symptoms or high perceived stress lev-
els.Journal of Crohn ’s & Colitis ,8(9), 945 –955. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crohns.2014.01.018
Byrne, G., Rosenfeld, G., Leung, Y., Qian, H., Raudzus, J., Nunez, C., & Bressler, B. (2017).
Prevalence of anxiety and depression in patients with inflammatory bowel disease. Canadian
Journal of Gastroenterology & Hepatology ,2017 , 6496727. https://doi.org/10.1155/2017/
6496727
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2000). Measuring healthy days: Population assess-
ment of health-related quality of life . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2018, November). Inflammatory bowel disease
prevalence (IBD) in the United States. Inflammatory Bowel Disease Data and Statistics .https://
www.cdc.gov/ibd/data-statistics.htm
Chorpita, B. F., & Daleiden, E. L. (2009). Mapping evidence-based treatments for children and
adolescents: application of the distillation and matching model to 615 treatments from 322randomized trials. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology ,77(3), 566 –579. https://doi.
org/10.1037/a0014565
Chorpita, B. F., Daleiden, E. L., & Weisz, J. R. (2005). Identifying and selecting the common ele-
ments of evidence based interventions: A distillation and matching model. Mental Health
Services Research ,7(1), 5–20.https://doi.org/10.1007/s11020-005-1962-6
Danesh, M., Gholamrezaei, A., Torkzadeh, F., Mirbagher, L., Soluki, R., & Emami, M. H. (2015).
Coping with stress in patients with inflammatory bowel disease and its relationship with dis-
ease activity, psychological disorders, and quality of life. International Journal of Body, Mind
and Culture ,2(2), 95 –104.
Faust, A. H., Halpern, L. F., Danoff-Burg, S., & Cross, R. K. (2012). Psychosocial factors contributing
to inflammatory bowel disease activity and health-related quality of life. Gastroenterology &
Hepatology ,8(3), 173 –181.
Freitas, T. H., Hyphantis, T. N., Andreoulakis, E., Quevedo, J., Miranda, H. L., Alves, G. S., Souza,
M. H., Braga, L. L., Pargament, K. I., Soczynska, J. K., McIntyre, R. S., & Carvalho, A. F. (2015).Religious coping and its influence on psychological distress, medication adherence, and qual-ity of life in inflammatory bowel disease. Brazilian Journal of Psychiatry ,37(3), 219 –227.
https://doi.org/10.1590/1516-4446-2014-1507
Goodhand, J. R., Wahed, M., & Rampton, D. S. (2009). Management of stress in inflammatory
bowel disease: A therapeutic option? Expert Review of Gastroenterology & Hepatology ,3(6),
661–679. https://doi.org/10.1586/egh.09.55
Greenley, R. N., Hommel, K. A., Nebel, J., Raboin, T., Li, S. H., Simpson, P., & Mackner, L. (2010). A
meta-analytic review of the psychosocial adjustment of youth with inflammatory bowel dis-
ease. Journal of Pediatric Psychology
,35(8), 857 –869. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpepsy/jsp120128 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
Jordan, C., Ohlsen, R., Hayee, B. H., & Chalder, T. (2018). A qualitative study exploring the experi-
ence of people with IBD and elevated symptoms of anxiety and low mood and the type ofpsychological help they would like. Psychology & Health ,33(5), 634 –651.
Jordan, C., Sin, J., Fear, N. T., & Chalder, T. (2016). A systematic review of the psychological corre-
lates of adjustment outcomes in adults with inflammatory bowel disease. Clinical Psychology
Review ,47,2 8–40.
Knowles, S. R., Monshat, K., & Castle, D. J. (2013). The efficacy and methodological challenges of
psychotherapy for adults with inflammatory bowel disease: A review. Inflammatory Bowel
Diseases ,19(12), 2704 –2715. https://doi.org/10.1097/MIB.0b013e318296ae5a
Mackner, L. M., Crandall, W. V., & Szigethy, E. M. (2006). Psychosocial functioning in pediatric
inflammatory bowel disease. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,12(3), 239 –244. https://doi.org/10.
1097/01.MIB.0000217769.83142.c6
Magalh ~aes, J., Castro, F. D. D., Carvalho, P. B., Moreira, M. J., & Cotter, J. (2014). Quality of life in
patients with inflammatory bowel disease: Importance of clinical, demographic and psycho-
social factors. Arquivos de Gastroenterologia ,51(3), 192 –197. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0004-
28032014000300005
McCombie, A. M., Mulder, R. T., & Gearry, R. B. (2013). Psychotherapy for inflammatory bowel dis-
ease: A review and update. Journal of Crohn ’s & Colitis ,7(12), 935 –949. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.crohns.2013.02.004
Megari, K. (2013). Quality of life in chronic disease patients. Health Psychology Research ,1(3), 27.
https://doi.org/10.4081/hpr.2013.932
Mikocka-Walus, A., Bampton, P., Hetzel, D., Hughes, P., Esterman, A., & Andrews, J. M. (2015).
Cognitive-behavioural therapy has no effect on disease activity but improves quality of life insubgroups of patients with inflammatory bowel disease: A pilot randomised controlled trial.BMC Gastroenterology ,15(1), 54. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12876-015-0278-2
Mikocka-Walus, A., Knowles, S. R., Keefer, L., & Graff, L. (2016). Controversies revisited: A system-
atic review of the comorbidity of depression and anxiety with inflammatory bowel diseases.
Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,22(3), 752 –762. https://doi.org/10.1097/MIB.0000000000000620
National Institute of Health. (2014, September). Ulcerative colitis. National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases .https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/digestive-dis-
eases/ulcerative-colitis
National Institute of Health. (2017, September). Symptoms & causes of Crohn ’s Disease. National
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases .https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-infor-
mation/digestive-diseases/crohns-disease/symptoms-causes
Reed-Knight, B., van Tilburg, M. A. L., Levy, R. L., Langer, S. L., Romano, J. M., Murphy, T. B.,
DuPen, M. M., & Feld, A. D. (2018). Maladaptive coping and depressive symptoms partially
explain the association between family stress and pain-related distress in youth with IBD.
Journal of Pediatric Psychology
,43(1), 94 –103. https://doi.org/10.1093/jpepsy/jsx082
Regueiro, M., Hashash, J. G., Kip, K. E., Ramalingam, S., Parkinson, M. D., Perkins, S., Manolis,
C. H., Watson, A. R., Bell-Temin, H., Weaver, E. K., Fultz, J., Kulus, A., Kontur, L., Smith-Seiler, D.,Marquis, G., & Szigethy, E. (2016). Mo1863 inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) complexity and
quality of life correlates with health care utilization in a new patient centered medical home
(PCMH). Gastroenterology ,150(4), S798 –S799. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-5085(16)32705-6
Reigada, L. C., Benkov, K. J., Bruzzese, J.-M., Hoogendoorn, C., Szigethy, E., Briggie, A., Walder,
D. J., & Warner, C. M. (2013). Integrating illness concerns into cognitive behavioral therapy forchildren and adolescents with inflammatory bowel disease and co-occurring anxiety. Journal
for Specialists in Pediatric Nursing 18 (2), 133 –143. https://doi.org/10.1111/jspn.12019
Schoultz, M., Atherton, I., & Watson, A. (2015). Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy for inflam-
matory bowel disease patients: Findings from an exploratory pilot randomised controlled trial.Trials ,16(1), 379. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13063-015-0909-5
Szigethy, E. V. A., Kenney, E., Carpenter, J., Hardy, D. M., Fairclough, D., Bousvaros, A., …&
DeMaso, D. R. (2007). Cognitive-behavioral therapy for adolescents with inflammatory bowel
disease and subsyndromal depression. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent
Psychiatry ,46(10), 1290 –1298.PSYCHOLOGY & HEALTH 129
Thompson, R. D., Craig, A., Crawford, E. A., Fairclough, D., Gonzalez-Heydrich, J., Bousvaros, A.,
Noll, R. B., DeMaso, D. R., & Szigethy, E. (2012). Longitudinal results of cognitive behavioral
treatment for youths with inflammatory bowel disease and depressive symptoms. Journal of
Clinical Psychology in Medical Settings ,19(3), 329 –337. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10880-012-
9301-8
Timmer, A., Preiss, J. C., Motschall, E., Ruecker, G., Jantschek, G., & Moser, G. (2011). Psychological
interventions for treatment of inflammatory bowel disease. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews , 2011(2), 8.
van Tilburg, M. A. L., Claar, R. L., Romano, J. M., Langer, S. L., Walker, L. S., Whitehead, W. E.,
Abdullah, B., Christie, D. L., & Levy, R. L. (2015). The role of coping with symptoms in depres-sion and disability: Comparison between inflammatory bowel disease and abdominal pain.
Journal of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition ,61(4), 431 –436. https://doi.org/10.1097/
MPG.0000000000000841
Von Wietersheim, J., & Kessler, H. (2006). Psychotherapy with chronic inflammatory bowel dis-
ease patients: A review. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases ,12(12), 1175 –1184. https://doi.org/10.
1097/01.mib.0000236925.87502.e0
Yeh, A. M., Wren, A., & Golianu, B. (2017). Mind –body interventions for pediatric inflammatory
bowel disease. Children ,4(4), 22. https://doi.org/10.3390/children4040022130 K. L. PRENDERGAST ET AL.
