Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Enhancing the translation of health behaviour
change research into practice: a selective
conceptual review of the synergy between
implementation science and health psychology
Justin Presseau, Lucie M.T. Byrne-Davis, Sarah Hotham, Fabiana Lorencatto,
Sebastian Potthoff, Lou Atkinson, Eleanor R. Bull, Alexandra L. Dima, Anne
van Dongen, David French, Nelli Hankonen, Jo Hart, Gill A. ten Hoor, Kristian
Hudson, Dominika Kwasnicka, Sanne van Lieshout, Jennifer McSharry,
Ellinor K. Olander, Rachael Powell, Elaine Toomey & Molly Byrne
To cite this article:  Justin Presseau, Lucie M.T. Byrne-Davis, Sarah Hotham, Fabiana Lorencatto,
Sebastian Potthoff, Lou Atkinson, Eleanor R. Bull, Alexandra L. Dima, Anne van Dongen, David
French, Nelli Hankonen, Jo Hart, Gill A. ten Hoor, Kristian Hudson, Dominika Kwasnicka, Sanne
van Lieshout, Jennifer McSharry, Ellinor K. Olander, Rachael Powell, Elaine Toomey & Molly
Byrne (2022) Enhancing the translation of health behaviour change research into practice:
a selective conceptual review of the synergy between implementation science and health
psychology, Health Psychology Review, 16:1, 22-49, DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2020.1866638
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1866638
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group
Published online: 25 Jan 2021.
Submit your article to this journal 
 Article views: 12148
View related articles 
 View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 16 View citing articles 

Enhancing the translation of health behaviour change research
into practice: a selective conceptual review of the synergybetween implementation science and health psychology
Justin Presseaua,b,c, Lucie M.T. Byrne-Davisd, Sarah Hothame, Fabiana Lorencattof,
Sebastian Pottho ﬀg, Lou Atkinsonh, Eleanor R. Bulli, Alexandra L. Dimaj,
Anne van Dongenk, David Frenchl, Nelli Hankonenm, Jo Hartd,
Gill A. ten Hoorn,o,Kristian Hudsonp,Dominika Kwasnickaq,r,Sanne van Lieshouts,
Jennifer McSharryt,Ellinor K. Olanderu,Rachael Powelll,Elaine Toomeyt,vand
Molly Byrnet
aClinical Epidemiology Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Canada;bSchool of Epidemiology and
Public Health, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada;cSchool of Psychology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada;
dDivision of Medical Education, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK;eCentre for Health Services Studies,
University of Kent, Canterbury, UK;fCentre for Behaviour Change, University College London, London, UK;
gDepartment of Social Work, Education, and Community Wellbeing, Northumbria University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
UK;hSchool of Psychology, Aston University, Birmingham, UK;iResearch Centre for Health, Psychology and
Communities, Manchester Metropolitan University, Manchester, UK;jHealth Services and Performance Research,
University Claude Bernard Lyon 1, Lyon, France;kHealth Sciences, University of York, York, UK;lSchool of Health
Sciences & Manchester Centre for Health Psychology, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK;mSocial
Psychology, Faculty of Social Sciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland;nDept of Work & Social Psychology,
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands;oDept of Health Promotion and Behavioral Sciences, The
University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, TX, USA;pCentre for Aging and Rehabilitation, Bradford
Institute for Health Research, Bradford, UK;qFaculty of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and
Humanities, Wroclaw, Poland;rNHMRC CRE in Digital Technology to Transform Chronic Disease Outcomes,
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia;sTeam Advies &
Onderzoek, Municipal Health Service (GGD) Kennemerland, Haarlem, the Netherlands;tHealth Behaviour Change
Research Group, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland;uCentre for Maternal and Child Health Research,
School of Health Sciences, City, University of London, London, United Kingdom;vSchool of Allied Health, University
of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland
ABSTRACT
Health psychology is at the forefront of developing and disseminating
evidence, theories, and methods that have improved the understanding
of health behaviour change. However, current dissemination
approaches may be insu ﬃcient for promoting broader application and
impact of this evidence to bene ﬁt the health of patients and the public.
Nevertheless, behaviour change theory/methods typically directedtowards health behaviours are now used in implementation science to
understand and support behaviour change in individuals at di ﬀerent
health system levels whose own behaviour impacts delivering evidence-based health behaviour change interventions. Despite contributing to
implementation science, health psychology is perhaps doing less to
draw from it. A redoubled focus on implementation science in health
psychology could provide novel prospects for enhancing the impact ofhealth behaviour change evidence. We report a Health PsychologyARTICLE HISTORY
Received 21 June 2019
Accepted 14 December 2020
KEYWORDS
Implementation science;intervention development;intervention mapping;behaviour change wheel;
theoretical domains
framework; behaviourchange
© 2021 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ),
which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.CONTACT Justin Presseau jpresseau@ohri.ca
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1866638HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW
2022, VOL. 16, NO. 1, 22 –49
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1866638
Review -speci ﬁc review-of-reviews of trials of health behaviour change
interventions published from inception to April 2020. We identi ﬁed 34
reviews and assessed whether implementation readiness of behaviour
change interventions was discussed. We then narratively review howimplementation science has integrated theory/methods from health
psychology and related discipline. Finally, we demonstrate how greater
synergy between implementation science and health psychology could
promote greater follow-through on advances made in the science of
health behaviour change.
Introduction
In the multidisciplinary landscape of contributions to the science of health behaviour change, health
psychology provides unique and novel advances through the development and application of over a
century of theory, evidence and measurement. Evidence generated within health psychology,
applied social psychology, behavioural medicine and psychology-informed health promotion litera-tures on what works and why for changing health behaviour has the potential to address key societal
health issues (e.g., Bélanger-Gravel et al., 2013 ; Caperon et al., 2018 ; Knittle et al., 2018 ; Kok et al.,
2018 ). However, it is not clear to what extent these behaviour change advances are implemented
and evaluated beyond research settings in which they are tested.
Health psychology journals and conferences showcase well-developed methods, compelling the-
ories, and rigorously developed, evaluated and synthesised interventions. While fundamental forsharing and promoting advancement within the ﬁeld, such dissemination approaches are unlikely
to be su ﬃcient for ensuring the implementation of ﬁndings more broadly and may amount to
‘preaching to the converted ’. There is a risk of producing an imbalance between the evidence of
what works (innovations), and what is actually delivered to patients and the public in practice
(implementation and impact). Assuming that health behaviour change research evidence will be
implemented by others may not be su ﬃciently capitalising on the potential of the evidence
being generated. Greater focus on implementation alongside innovation in health psychology
may promote wider-scale impact.
Gaps between research evidence and actual practice were recognised in the evidence-based
practice movement in medicine, which highlighted that patients do not receive healthcare accord-ing to best evidence: 30% –40% do not receive healthcare according to clinical evidence and up to
25% of care provided is unnecessary or even harmful (Grol, 2001 ; McGlynn et al., 2003 ). In health psy-
chology, it is not yet clear what evidence is being implemented into routine practice, or even wherethe evidence-practice gaps lie for practicing health psychologists and other health professionals
(e.g., physicians, nurses, public health practitioners) who routinely deliver health behaviourchange interventions to patients and the public. While health psychology has much to contribute
to the health and well-being of patients and populations, the question remains whether health psy-
chology is fully realising the potential of the evidence being generated. Is health psychology follow-ing-through on its breakthroughs (cf Woolf, 2006 )?
Systematic reviews of experimental and trial evidence demonstrating the bene ﬁt of speciﬁ c inter-
ventions, strategies and techniques for changing behaviour form the empirical foundation to justifyadvances that might be ready for delivery in routine healthcare settings. For example, implemen-
tation intentions emerged from social psychology (Gollwitzer, 1999 ), is embedded in contemporary
health behaviour change theories (Hagger & Chatzisarantis, 2014 ; Schwarzer, 2008 ) and arguably has
the evidence-base favouring use in routine health settings when supporting health behaviourchange: evidence supports its use for promoting physical activity (Bélanger-Gravel et al., 2013 )
and healthy/unhealthy eating (Adriaanse et al., 2011 ) and possibly across a range of other health
behaviours (Squires et al., 2013 ). The extent to which implementation intentions are used byHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 23
various healthcare providers in various jurisdictions, for various behaviours remains an empirical
implementation question (e.g., Gonzalez Salas Duhne et al., in press ). This intention-behaviour
gap-bridging breakthrough in health behaviour change may currently be largely con ﬁned to disci-
plinary bounds and to the trials in which it has been tested rather than truly impacting on patientsand population in routine healthcare settings. Implementation intentions are but one example. It isclear from the multiple systematic reviews of trials of health behaviour change interventions pub-
lished in Health Psychology Review to date that much is known about health behaviour change.
However, their readiness for implementation, evaluation and use in routine practice by health psy-
chology practitioners and other health professionals supporting people to change their behaviour
remains unclear. Clarifying the maturity of the evidence to inform readiness for implementation
and accompanying implementation research and evaluation would be key towards following-through on advances in the science of health behaviour change.
While some evidenced health behaviour change interventions may be ready for implementation
and implementation research, publishing a review of evidence that favours a given health behaviourchange intervention is only the ﬁrst step in ensuring the move from evidence to routine practice. The
past two decades has seen the emergence of implementation science, which focuses squarely onthis issue: studying how to move research evidence into routine healthcare to change the care pro-vided in the real world. Implementation science is ‘the scienti ﬁc study of methods to promote the
systematic uptake of research ﬁndings and other evidence-based practices into routine practice,
and, hence to improve the quality and eﬀ ectiveness of health services (p. 1) ’(Eccles & Mittman,
2006 ). Paradoxically, a potential issue is that though health psychology and related disciplines
have contributed much toimplementation science, health psychologists may not yet be aware of
this contribution. Perhaps as a result, health psychology has seemingly done less so far to drawfrom implementation science to inform the wider impact of evidence-based health behaviour
change interventions. This may partly be due to a lack of awareness of the synergy between the dis-ciplines, of what health psychology has already contributed to implementation science, and of newopportunities a ﬀorded by applying implementation science principles in health psychology.
Weconvenedameetingconsistingofhealthpsychologyandimplementationscienceresearchersand
practitionersspanningAustralia,Canada,Finland,France,Ireland,Poland,theNetherlands,theUKandtheUS to discuss links and opportunities between health psychology and implementation science. The
meeting highlighted the lack of clarity in the literature on conceptual links between the two disciplines,
particularly regarding four issues that the present review seeks to address: (a) the lack of clarity on theextent to which the behaviour change evidence generated within health psychology is being
implemented beyond the trials being synthesised in systematic reviews, (b) the lack of awareness of
the degree to which implementation science has drawn from methods and theories used in health psy-chology, and therefore (c) the potential opportunity for health psychology to further enhance its tra-
ditional remit to emphasise implementation and (d) to contribute further to implementation science
whiledrawing fromit to evaluateandenhance the impact ofevidence-basedbehaviourchangeinterven-tionsforthehealthandwell-beingofpatientsandpopulations.Co-authorsself-selectedintoeachofthese
four issues and worked together to identify key literature to address each point with the aim of highlight-
ing synergies between health psychology and implementation science and the potential for advancingimpact of health behaviour change intervention outside of disciplinary bounds. The result formed the
basisforthepresentreview,whichsoughttoaddresstheseissuesbynarrativelysynthesisingnon-exhaus-
tive internationally representative exemplars of literature to draw links between implementation scienceand health psychology, seeking to highlight opportunity for further synergy.
With this narrative conceptual review, our goal was to highlight whether existing evidence of health
behaviour change interventions is described in terms of its readiness for implementation research andevaluation; to highlight how much implementation science has drawn from a broad and international
range of behaviour change theories and methods, and to highlight a range of contemporary approaches
in implementation science that health psychologists could further adopt. Our ﬁrst aim was therefore to
identify reviews of randomised trials of health behaviour change interventions published in one journal24 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
(Health Psychology Review ) and chart the current extent of discussion of readiness of the interventions for
implementation and evaluation beyond the trials. We then aimed to describe existing synergies
between health psychology and implementation science that may help to promote a greater focus
on the opportunities for rigorous design and evaluation of the implementation of e ﬀective health behav-
iour change interventions by (a) taking stock of key contributions that health psychology and related
disciplines (applied social psychology, health promotion) have made to implementation science, (b) dis-
cussing the potential of implementation science for enhancing the impact of health behaviour change
evidence, and (c) recommending how health psychologists can supplement current evidence dissemi-nation activities with e ﬀorts towards implementing evidence to enhance the impact of their research
while also contributing to implementation science itself.
Identifying discussion about readiness for implementation in systematic reviews of trials
of health behaviour change interventions published in Health Psychology Review
Methods
We were interested in whether the reviews of trials of health behaviour change interventions pub-
lished in Health Psychology Review make mention of the extent to which the evidence synthesised is
ready for implementation research, delivery and evaluation beyond the trials in which they were
tested. We identi ﬁed and screened all articles published and in press in Health Psychology Review
from inception to 27 April 2020 using PsycINFO (journal title used for search strategy) to identify
empirical systematic reviews of trials of health behaviour change interventions. An initial screening
was conducted in December 2019 and updated in April 2020.
Inclusion criteria. We included systematic reviews (and reviews of reviews) of randomised con-
trolled trials of health behaviour change interventions that reported a pooled e ﬀect size of a
health behaviour change intervention (broadly de ﬁned as testing a strategy, programme, or one
or more behaviour change techniques/methods or modes of delivery) on a health behaviour.
Exclusion criteria. We excluded reviews that did not include any randomised controlled trials, did
not report a pooled quantitative analysis on a health behaviour change outcome, or that focusedonly on theory-based process measures (e.g., intention, risk perceptions) or only on psychological
or physical health outcomes (e.g., well-being, weight).
Screening. Two authors (GtH, ET) used Covidence to independently screen titles and abstracts, then
full-text, resolving con ﬂicts with a third reviewer (JP) when needed.
Data extraction. Two authors (LBD and AD) extracted the author, year, target population, behaviour
(s), setting, and description of behaviour change interventions from included articles. They thenindependently double-coded whether each included review had any mention of the readiness of
the intervention being synthesised for moving to implementation research and practice (coding:
yes, no, unclear) and whether the review speciﬁ cally extracted data on implementation readiness
(yes, no, n/a, unclear). Of reviews that did, they coded whether the intervention was deemed by
reviews to be ready for implementation research or practice (yes, no, n/a, unclear). Discrepancies
were resolved through discussion, involving a third author (JP).
Results and discussion
Of the 323 articles published in Health Psychology Review from inception to April 2020, we identi ﬁed
34 reviews of randomised controlled trials of health behaviour change interventions with health
behaviour outcomes (see PRISMA diagram in online appendix). As seen in Table 1, the majority
focused on physical activity ( n= 12) or multiple health behaviours ( n= 12), while others focused
on eating ( n= 3), medication adherence/prescribing ( n= 3), breastfeeding ( n= 2), alcoholHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 25
Table 1. Systematic reviews with meta-analyses of trials of health behaviour change and health promotion interventions published in Health Psychology Review (2007 –2020).
Authors (Year) PopulationIntervention
settingTargeted
health behaviourBehaviour change
intervention synthesisedReview discusses
implementation-
readiness
of interventionIf discussed, does the
review suggest evidence
supports intervention
implementation-ready?
Abraham and
Graham-Rowe
(2009 )Employees Workplace Physical activity Workplace-based no n/a
Albarracín et al.
(2018 )Adults Any Smoking; Diet; Physical
ActivityVarious strategies focused on changing
multiple health behavioursno n/a
Allom et al. ( 2016 ) Any Any Eating, Alcohol
consumptionInhibitory control training (suppression of
actions that interfere with goal-
directed behaviour)no n/a
Aulbach et al.
(2019 )Any Any Eating Implicit bias interventions no n/a
Bélanger-Gravel
et al. ( 2013 )Adults 18– 64 Any Physical activity Implementation intentions no no
Benn et al. ( 2016 ) Any non-clinical Any Eating Self-weighing no n/a
Black et al. ( 2016 ) Any non-clinical Digital Alcohol consumption Computer-delivered no n/a
Cameron et al.
(2015 )Any Any Multiple Positive a ﬀect induction no n/a
Caperon et al.
(2018 )Any Low- or Middle-Income
CountryEating Various behaviour change techniques yes yes
Carr et al. ( 2019 ) Any Any Physical activity Diadic interventions no n/a
Cross and She ﬃeld
(2019 )Adults Any Eating; Physical activity;
Smoking, Diabetesself-careMental contrasting yes yes
Davie et al. ( 2019 ) Adult women delivering single
baby at ≥37 + 0 weeks ’
gestationMultiple Breast feeding Social-psychological interventions yes no
Dombrowski et al.
(2012 )Adults aged ≥40
 years and
BMI≥30 with additional risk
factorsAny Eating; Physical activity Various behaviour change techniques no n/a
Gilinsky et al. ( 2015 ) Postnatal women Any Physical activity Various behaviour change techniques no n/a
Gourlan et al.
(2016 )Adults Any Physical activity Theory-based no n/a
Griﬃ ths et al.
(2018 )Pregnant women Digital Smoking cessation Digital interventions no n/a
Hennessy et al.
(2020 )Any Any Any Self-regulation interventions no n/a
Kassavou and
Sutton ( 2018 )Adults prescribed oral
medication to treat/preventcardio-metabolic conditionsPrimary care,
secondary care andpharmacyMedication adherence Automated telecommunication no n/a26 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Kassianos et al.
(2019 )Women in the postpartum
periodAny Breastfeeding Various behaviour change techniques unclear unclear
Lock et al. ( 2020 ) Employees Any Physical activity Theory-based unclear unclear
McEwan et al.
(2016 )Any Any Physical activity Goal setting no n/a
McEwan et al.
(2019 )Any Any Physical activity Theory-based no n/a
Ntoumanis et al.
(2020 )Any Any Any Self-determination theory-informed no n/a
O’Brien et al. ( 2015 ) Adults 55– 70 years, healthy or
at risk of chronic diseaseAny Physical activity Various behaviour change techniques no n/a
Orr and King ( 2015 ) Any Any Any Mobile SMS messages yes yes
Peters et al. ( 2013 ) Any Any Any Fear appeals no n/a
Protogerou et al.
(2020 )Any Any Unhealthy risk-taking Self-regulation interventions no n/a
Rhodes et al. ( 2019 ) Adults Any Physical activity A ﬀective judgment manipulation no n/a
Rhodes et al. ( 2020 ) Adults Any Physical activity Theory-based no n/a
Spring et al. ( 2020 ) Any Any Eating; Physical activity Self-regulation interventions no n/a
Suls et al. ( 2020 ) General public Any Multiple Self-regulation interventions no n/a
Taylor et al. ( 2013 ) Employees Workplace Physical activity Various behaviour change techniques no n/a
Thoolen et al.
(2012 )Patients or members of the
publicGeneral public; General
practice; outpatient
clinicAntibiotic prescribing Patient-oriented no n/a
Wilson et al. ( 2020 ) People with chronic conditions Any Medication adherence Self-regulation interventions no n/aHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 27
consumption ( n= 1) and smoking ( n= 1). Most reviews did not focus on a particular intervention
setting or target population. Interventions tested were varied, ranging from speci ﬁc behaviour
change techniques/methods tested experimentally (e.g., implementation intentions, goal setting)
or via meta-regression and sub-group meta-analysis, to interventions based on particular behaviour
change theory (e.g., self-determination theory), to interventions de ﬁned by their mode of delivery
(e.g., text messages) or setting (e.g., workplace). Only four included reviews had a mention of the
potential of the intervention and its evidence-base for moving to implementation research or prac-
tice and no reviews extracted implementation-related data.
Given the health behaviour change evidence being generated and reviewed, there is clear
impetus to focus greater attention on whether the strength of the evidence for a given health behav-iour change intervention justi ﬁes (or not) moving to an implementation phase yet, and if not, what
would be needed to get there. Such indication could bene ﬁt those who are already delivering health
behaviour change interventions in practice. This would also provide the evidentiary foundation fordrawing upon implementation science to rigorously move interventions into practice. The ground-work has been laid for such synergies between health psychology and implementation science, but
the implications and opportunities of these synergies may not yet have fully permeated into health
psychology. The following conceptual overview aims to redress this to enhance capacity to rigor-ously follow-through on advances in the science of health behaviour change.
Taking stock: what has health psychology contributed to implementation science?
Traditionally, disciplines such as health psychology, applied social psychology and health promotionhave focused on the health behaviours of patients and the public. However, pioneering health andsocial psychologists recognised that the behaviour of healthcare providers could also be a focus of
inquiry, allowing for the application of methods and theories from health psychology to the beha-
viours of those involved in providing health care (Bartholomew Eldredge et al., 2016 ; Michie & John-
ston, 2004 ). This conceptual shift recognises behaviour change as important in individuals at
multiple levels. Instead of contrasting ‘individualistic ’against ‘organisational/system ’approaches,
this false dichotomy is recti ﬁed by considering the actors at various levels whose behaviour needs
to change (Bartholomew et al., 2001 ; Sniehotta et al., 2017 ): patients, health professionals, service
providers, teachers, family members, managers, commissioners, policy makers, and politicians.Any intervention is ultimately mediated through someone doing something diﬀerently somewhere,
at some level . Herein, we focus largely on health care professionals as one such group of actors,
recognising that the same principles apply across a range of actors at diﬀ erent levels. This shift in
paradigm moves away from relegating change in the behaviour of those who deliver interventionsto the purview of ‘education and training ’that might be the responsibility of another discipline.
Instead, there are opportunities within health psychology to focus on understanding speci ﬁc
theory-based determinants of, and strategies for changing, the behaviour of healthcare professionalsand other actors at all levels of a healthcare system.
Do theories, methods and measures typically applied to health behaviours in patients and the
public also apply to health professionals? This is an empirical question and the answer to date is,in short, yes. Implementation scientists are applying theories and methods from health psychology
and related disciplines that health psychology draws from to improve healthcare. Key contributions
to implementation science –described below –include the centrality of behaviour, the role of
behaviour change theory, methods for behaviour change intervention development and evaluation,
and methods for theory-informed evidence synthesis.
Contribution 1: the centrality of behaviour
While behaviour is a fundamental outcome of interest in health psychology, behaviour is not necess-
arily measured or even considered in other health disciplines. Initially within social psychology,28 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Fishbein ( 1967 ) proposed that behaviour be de ﬁned by the target of the action, the action itself, and
thecontext and time of its performance; i.e., the ‘TACT ’principle. However, the target of the action
may be someone other than the self and as a result, adding the actor has been a recent extension
driven by applications of the TACT principle in implementation science (Francis & Presseau, 2019 ;
Presseau et al., 2019 ). Implementation science has taken up this call for behavioural speci ﬁcity,
recognising the importance of identifying, de ﬁning and measuring behaviour (Michie et al., 2009 ;
Michie & Johnston, 2004 ).
It can be challenging to identify whose and which behaviour(s) to target and it may not be feas-
ible to address all behaviours. Guiding principles can help to prioritise a focal behaviour: (a) per-
ceived importance and changeability of the determinants of behaviour, (b) impact if the
behaviour were to be changed; (c) anticipated ease of changing the behaviour; (d) importance ofthe behaviour relative to other behaviours; and (e) ease with which the behaviour can be measured
(Bartholomew Eldredge et al., 2016 ; Michie et al., 2011 ). Such behaviour analysis is often aided by
seeking input from healthcare stakeholders to clarify who should be involved (Kok et al., 2015 ;
Wolk et al., 2017 ). Behaviour change approaches can also be used by health professionals themselves
to understand their own behaviour(s) and develop and test their own interventions, in action
research or organisational participatory research (Bull et al., 2019 ).
TACT speciﬁ cation and behaviour analysis have been useful for de ﬁning healthcare professional
behaviours that need to be increased (e.g., hand washing in hospitals) and those that need to stop(e.g., reducing unnecessary blood transfusions (Hartley et al., 2017 ) or reduced antibiotic prescription
(Duncan et al., 2020 )). De-implementation, i.e., stopping practices that are not in line with clinical
research evidence, has become a major focus in implementation science (Prasad & Ioannidis,2014 ) to which health psychology continues to have much to contribute such as in habit theory,
operant learning theory and the use of speciﬁ c behaviour change techniques to promote de-
implementation (Gardner et al., 2010 ; Patey et al., 2018 ; Voorn et al., 2017 ).
Contribution 2: the role of behaviour change theory in implementation science
Improving patient care is not easy and when successful can result in small changes that are hard tomaintain and replicate (Dixon-Woods et al., 2013 ). Shojania and Grimshaw ( 2005 ) recognised that
there are no magic bullets for improving healthcare, with implementation sometimes describedas a ‘slow and haphazard process’ (Grimshaw et al., 2007 ). To address and accelerate this, implemen-
tation research has applied theory to synthesise existing evidence, to identify barriers and enablers
and correlates of behaviour, to develop and evaluate implementation interventions, and to provide
testable explanations for change (Davies et al., 2010 ; Eccles et al., 2005 ). The application of theories of
behaviour in implementation science contributes to building a cumulative science, designing and
evaluating interventions, and helping to identify the conditions necessary for their success
(Davido ﬀet al., 2015 ).
At the turn of the twenty- ﬁrst century, health psychology was in the throes of social cognition
model testing, with the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) as a central theory being used topredict health behaviours (Ajzen, 1991 ; McEachan et al., 2011 ). It remained an open question
whether the same social cognition models could be used to predict healthcare professional behav-
iour. Adapting good practice methods for constructing TPB questionnaires (Francis et al., 2004 ), a
literature emerged showing that indeed, core theories of social cognition of the time could also
be applied to predict a range of healthcare professional behaviours with e ﬀect sizes equivalent to
those observed when predicting health behaviours in patients and the public (for a review, seeGodin et al., 2008 ). Contemporary theories from health psychology have since further been used
to predict healthcare professional behaviours (de Bruin et al., 2018 ; Potthoﬀ et al., 2019 )
While implementation scientists recognised the value of theory, a key challenge is in selecting a
theory among the dozens available. Broad frameworks have been developed by teams that includehealth psychologists to synthesise key constructs from behaviour and behaviour change theories.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 29
The Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) is an example of such a framework and has been particu-
larly well-adopted in implementation science. The TDF summarises constructs from over 30 theoriesof behaviour and behaviour change into 14 broad domains (Atkins et al., 2017 ; Cane et al., 2012 ;
Michie et al., 2005 ). The TDF has been used as a basis for conducting theory-based qualitative
studies to identify potentially relevant behavioural factors in health professionals to target in inter-vention development (Patey et al., 2012 ), informing questionnaire studies that operationalise the
TDF (Huijg et al., 2014 ; Taylor et al., 2013 ) and to identify theory-based correlates of health pro-
fessional behaviour (Beenstock et al., 2012 ).
Contribution 3: methods for developing and evaluating implementation interventions
informed by behaviour change theory
Implementation interventions aim to embed and scale up programmes, treatments, and services
that have been shown to be eﬀ ective, and to de-implement those that are not. Implementation
science is not short of frameworks for guiding the process of developing implementation interven-
tions (Nilsen, 2015 ). A unique feature of approaches originating from (or in ﬂuenced by) health psy-
chology and related psychology-informed disciplines is their direct link to behaviour change theory,
ensuring that interventions draw upon and contribute to a cumulative evidence base, rooted in a
consistently applied scienti ﬁc language. Two key approaches to intervention development within
(or informed by) health psychology and related disciplines have informed implementation interven-
tions: applications of speciﬁ c behaviour change theories to specify intervention content and mech-
anisms (e.g., social cognition models, dual process models, control theory or operant learning) anduse of broader frameworks to guide the intervention development process itself. Amongst others,three international contemporary approaches to intervention development with roots in health psy-
chology and related disciplines have contributed to implementation science: Intervention Mapping
(Bartholomew Eldredge et al., 2016 ; Fernandez et al., 2019 ), the Behaviour Change Wheel (BCW;
including the TDF and Behaviour Change Techniques taxonomy (Michie et al., 2013 )), and the
French model (French et al., 2012 )]. As described in Table 2, each of these intervention development
process frameworks broadly involves three linked steps: (1) Behaviour diagnostics to de ﬁne beha-
viours to be changed and their theory-based determinants; (2) Developing theory-based interventions
by linking theory-informed barriers/enablers or determinants to intervention strategies, and (3) Eval-
uating processes of change in the interventions in terms of mechanisms of action (mediation and
moderation) and intervention ﬁdelity (Araújo-Soares et al., 2019 ).
Step (1) Behaviour diagnostics: de ﬁning behaviours and their theory-based determinants.
Thisﬁrst step involves de ﬁning who needs to do what di ﬀerently and what barriers, enablers and
determinants a ﬀect their behaviour (French et al., 2012 ), informed by TACT. In implementation
science, this involves specifying health care professional (or other environmental agent) behaviour(s) that must change for implementation to be successful and using behaviour change theory to ident-ify these barriers and enablers. While the BCW synthesises constructs across theories into broader
domains, Intervention Mapping proposes the consideration of multiple diﬀ erent theories in their
own right, and the French model suggests using an overarching synthesising theoretical framework
(e.g., TDF) as a basis for identifying barriers and enablers. Each framework proposes the use of multiple
methods for identifying theory-based determinants: primary data collection using interviews, focus
groups, questionnaires, observation of practice, and/or systematic reviews of such evidence.
Step (2a) Developing new theory-based implementation interventions by drawing on
health psychology and related disciplines. Once determinants of clinical practice are identi ﬁed,
Intervention Mapping, BCW and the French model suggest using theory and evidence-basedmethods to select intervention components and develop interventions. Intervention Mapping
emphasises identifying theory-based methods most likely to in ﬂuence changes in the selected deter-
minants and then translating these into practical strategies taking in account the parameters for
eﬀectiveness (Kok et al., 2016 ). The BCW proposes linking barriers to intervention functions (broad30 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
categories of means by which an intervention can change behaviour e.g., education or modelling),
and policy categories to support these interventions (e.g., guidelines or communication and market-
ing). The French model focuses on linking TDF domains to speci ﬁc behaviour change techniques
(BCTs) (Centre for Behaviour Change, 2019 ; Michie et al., 2008 ).
Step (2b) Optimising existing implementation interventions by drawing on health psychol-
ogy and related disciplines. There are already many implementation interventions to improve
healthcare professional behaviours. Given the infrastructure, personnel, and relationships required
for some implementation interventions, another way in which health psychology has contributed
is in optimising existing implementation interventions with behaviour change approaches
(Pearson et al., 2020 ). Explicitly describing an implementation intervention ’s components, theoretical
underpinning and causal assumptions facilitates external scrutiny and more e ﬀective evaluation
(Moore et al., 2015 ). For instance, an intervention to implement sepsis care was initially evaluated
within three pilot wards of a UK hospital (Steinmo et al., 2015 ). Despite initial success in increasing
implementation of the bundle from 20% to 80% of septic patients, improvements plateaued and fellshort of the 95% implementation target. Steinmo et al. ( 2015 ) applied the BCW, TDF and BCT taxon-
omy to specify existing intervention content, conduct observations of intervention delivery and
conduct interviews with intervention designers and providers to identify barriers and enablers to
implementation. Triangulating ﬁndings helped to identify behaviour change theory-informed re ﬁne-
ments to the intervention prior to rolling it out.
Health policy articles are a means of disseminating recommendations supporting the implemen-
tation of health behaviour change interventions. Yet, the assumed mechanisms of action in suchdocuments are rarely detailed explicitly. Seppälä et al. ( 2018 ) used the TDF, BCT Taxonomy
version 1 (BCTTv1) and the BCW to identify and categorise the targets, mediators, and change strat-egies for physical activity and nutrition behaviour change in workplace health promotion policyTable 2. Key phases, use of theory and examples of three health psychology-informed implementation frameworks.
Intervention Mapping Behaviour Change Wheel The French et al. model
Key phases Step 1: Logic Model of the
Problem
Step 2: Program Outcomes and
Objectives –Logic Model
of Change
Step 3 –Program Design
Step 4 –Program production
Step 5: Program
Implementation Plan
Step 6: Evaluation PlanUnderstanding the behaviour
.Step 1: De ﬁne the problem in
behavioural terms
.Step 2: Select target
behaviour
.Step 3: Specify the target
behaviour
.Step 4: Identify what needs to
change
Identifying intervention options
.Step 5: Identify interventionfunctions
.Step 6: Identify policycategories
Identifying content and
implementation options
.Step 7: Identify behaviour
change techniques
.Step 8: Identify modes ofdeliveryStep 1: Identify who needs to do what
diﬀerently
Step 2: Identify barriers and enablers using
a theoretical framework
Step 3: Identify behaviour change
techniques and modes of deliverybest suited to address identi ﬁed
barriers and enablers
Step 4: Select measures of behaviour and
mediators/moderators of change
Use of theory Whole theories used and
combined by applying ‘Core
Processes ’Summarized groups of constructs
used e.g., Capability,Opportunity, Motivation, andTDF domainsTheories or groups of constructs, TDF
example providedHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 31
articles. Together, these examples highlight how theory and methods used in health psychology are
and can be used in implementation science to develop new, and improve existing, implementationinterventions.
Step (3) Process evaluation. A gold standard for evaluating implementation interventions is the
randomised (or cluster randomised) trial to establish causal evidence of whether or not animplementation intervention is eﬀ ective, and implementation science is not short of such trials
(cf. Cochrane E ﬀective Practice and Organization of Care reviews). However, e ﬀect estimates on a
health professional behaviour change outcome alone are not necessarily su ﬃcient to understand
how the intervention works and says little about why it was not e ﬀective if there is no eﬀ ect. This
‘black box’ undermines replication of eﬀ ective interventions and adjustments to ine ﬀective interven-
tions. Decision makers tasked with improving healthcare systems cannot rely solely on trial evidenceto inform implementation of interventions in new settings (Ivers & Grimshaw, 2016 ; Moore et al.,
2015 ). Implementation science has recognised the importance of clarifying factors in ﬂuencing the
eﬀectiveness of interventions to understand ‘what works and why ’(Bellg et al., 2004 ; Hardeman
et al., 2008 ) and draws upon theories and methods from health psychology and related disciplines
to further evaluate interventions using process evaluations.
The term ‘process evaluation ’holds di ﬀerent meanings and takes di ﬀerent forms (Steckler &
Linnan, 2014 ). While the term is not necessarily commonplace in health psychology, health psychol-
ogists have been conducting process evaluations for decades. Manipulation checks, theory-basedmediation/moderation analyses, and post-intervention qualitative inquiry are often inherent toevaluations of health psychology interventions to assess whether intervention e ﬀects are consistent
with theory-based hypotheses. Findings from process evaluations enable further interpretation oftrial outcomes and inform replication and scalability. Health psychology has contributed uniquetheory and methods for process evaluation to implementation science: methods for assessing inter-
vention mechanisms of action and ﬁdelity.
Mechanisms of action (mediation and moderation analyses). Investigating mechanisms of action
within a process evaluation (particularly using an experimental design) helps to clarify, test, and re ﬁne
the mechanisms through which interventions operate to achieve behaviour change (Moore et al.,
2015 ). There have been many calls from the literature for the need for more experimental tests of
mechanisms of behaviour change, greater rigour in the design of such evaluations, rooted in theoryand pre-speci ﬁed logic models (Hagger et al., 2020 ; Rothman et al., 2020 ; Sheeran et al., 2017 ). These
are echoed by syntheses of such studies that highlight the relative dearth of high quality reviews of
mechanisms of action and process evaluations (Hennessy et al., 2020 ).
The utility of theory in mechanistic process evaluations in implementation science is recognised
(Grimshaw et al., 2007 ). However, a systematic review investigating theory use in 123 process evalu-
ations conducted alongside interventions to change healthcare professional behaviour identi ﬁed
that only 20% of studies cited a classic social/health psychology or implementation theory, and
only seven reported actually testing a theory (McIntyre et al., 2020 ). Drawing on classic health psy-
chology methods, studies that did test theory typically hypothesised and subsequently testedtheory-informed mechanisms of action by either assessing whether theoretical constructs (e.g.,change in intention) mediate intervention e ﬀects (e.g., in this case, healthcare professional behav-
iour change), or comparing di ﬀerences in theoretical construct scores between trial arms (Bosch
et al., 2014 ; Desveaux et al., 2015 ; Grimshaw et al., 2014 ; Zwerver et al., 2013 ). For instance, in an inter-
vention testing di ﬀerent forms of printed educational material to increase general practitioners ’
referrals of patients for retinal screening, a TPB-based process evaluation was conducted alongsidea factorial randomised trial (Grimshaw et al., 2014 ). The trial process evaluation was also factorial and
involved administering questionnaires to physicians assessing each TPB construct pre- and post-
intervention. Findings showed that pre-intervention intention scores were already high, with no sig-
niﬁcant di ﬀerences post-intervention between intervention and control group scores on intention,
attitude, subjective norm, and perceived behavioural control across factors. An intervention32 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
targeting motivation was thus unlikely to be eﬀ ective and the theorised pathway of change was not
supported; thereby explaining in part the lack of observed intervention e ﬀects in the trial itself. There
is much opportunity for embedding such theory-based mechanism of change process evaluations
alongside trials of implementation interventions.
Intervention ﬁdelity. Interventions may achieve limited eﬀ ects due to not being properly delivered or
received (Borrelli, 2011 ) or may achieve intended outcomes despite inconsistent or poor ﬁdelity. An
intervention not delivered or received as intended may have untrustworthy ﬁndings that need to be
interpreted with caution and may be di ﬃcult to replicate. Interventions to change professional prac-
tice are complex, involving multiple components, targeting multiple levels in the health system,
groups of healthcare or other professionals, across multiple organisations; thereby increasing theirsusceptibility to variable delivery and receipt (Steckler & Linnan, 2014 ). Assessing ﬁdelity of delivery
is vital to increasing con ﬁdence in interpretation of outcomes (Borrelli, 2011 ). Psychologists have
proposed many intervention ﬁdelity conceptual frameworks, providing methodological recommen-
dations for strategies to enhance systematic and replicable assessment of delivery ﬁdelity that have
since been taken up in implementation science (Bellg et al., 2004 ; Borrelli, 2011 ; Carroll et al., 2007 ).
For instance, Intervention Mapping has been used to assess the ﬁdelity of delivery and receipt, and
dose of a sex education programme delivered by teachers (Rijsdijk et al., 2014 ). The BCT taxonomy
has been used to assess ﬁdelity of delivery of an intervention to improve general practitioners ’man-
agement of back pain (French et al., 2015 ) of HCPs’ delivery of evidence based smoking cessation
advice (McIntyre et al., 2020 ) and in audit and feedback interventions to reduce unnecessary
blood transfusions (Lorencatto et al., 2016 ).
Contribution 4: methods for theory-informed evidence synthesis
A frequent ﬁnding from systematic reviews of implementation interventions is the heterogeneity in
outcomes across interventions, with limited clarity around what makes one intervention more
eﬀective than another in changing professional practice. For example, Audit and Feedback (A&F)
is a very common strategy used to promote change in healthcare professional behaviour, involving
providing a summary of clinical performance to healthcare provider(s) (Ivers et al., 2012 ). A Cochrane
review of 140 randomised trials showed that A&F led to a median 4.3% absolute improvement inimproved clinical practice (Ivers et al., 2012 ). However, eﬀ ects were variable, with a quarter of
trials showing a large eﬀ ect on clinical practice (>16% absolute improvement), while another
quarter had negative or null eﬀ ects. E ﬀectiveness has not improved over time (Ivers et al., 2014a ).
Reasons underpinning this variability and lack of progress are unclear, in part due to poor descriptionof the A&F interventions, and because A&F has been designed and delivered in various ways, often
lacking explicit rationale or theory (Colquhoun et al., 2017 ). The application of theory and frame-
works developed in psychology and applied in health psychology in evidence syntheses has
enabled implementation researchers to identify active ingredients of interventions associated
with increased eﬀ ectiveness. Control Theory (Carver & Scheier, 1982 ) is a mechanism through
which A&F might operate and Gardner et al. ( 2010 ) re-analysed data from an earlier Cochrane
review of A&F interventions to change professional practice, coding for the presence of thesetheory-consistent techniques. They identi ﬁed that most A&F interventions were not consistent
with Control Theory, suggesting future possibilities for theory-informed optimisation.
Describing the active ingredients of implementation interventions in concrete behaviour change
terms using a shared language fosters the ability to synthesise evidence from across a variety of
implementation settings. Intervention Mapping proposes a taxonomy of behaviour changemethods and their parameters for e ﬀectiveness, that are directly linked to speciﬁ c theory-based
determinants (Kok et al., 2016 ). The BCTTv1 (Michie et al., 2013 ) provides a list of potential active
ingredients of interventions speciﬁ ed at a granular level and di ﬀerentiated from each other. The
BCTTv1 has been used to identify the active behaviour change content within systematic reviewsHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 33
of trials of healthcare professional behaviour change interventions (Lawrenson et al., 2018 ; McHugh
et al., 2018 ; Presseau et al., 2015 ), as has the BCW (Michie et al., 2011 ) to identify and categorise the
functions of existing interventions (Gardner et al., 2016 ). So too could the Intervention Mapping
coding taxonomy be used (Durks et al., 2017 ; Fernandez et al., 2019 ; Kok et al., 2016 ). Such speci ﬁca-
tion provides a more detailed description of intervention content in existing interventions, and a
basis for meta-regressions to explore relationships between observed e ﬀects and constituent behav-
iour change technique, methods and/or intervention functions.
In a Cochrane review of interventions to improve antimicrobial prescribing practices in secondary
care (Davey et al., 2017 ), the main comparison was between any intervention to improve antibiotic
prescribing for hospital inpatients versus standard practice. To explore heterogeneity, the BCW andBCT Taxonomy were used to identify and classify the intervention functions and component BCTs.Sub-group analyses showed that the intervention functions ‘restriction ’and ‘enablement ’were
associated with greater improvement in outcomes and interventions including ‘feedback on behav-
iour’had additional eﬀ ects. Findings point to the speciﬁ c types of intervention strategies and com-
ponents that contribute to intervention outcomes.
Taxonomies that typically focus on the behaviour of patients and citizens can thus also be used to
describe the active ingredients of implementation interventions to change healthcare providerbehaviour. This provides a basis for drawing from and contributing to a cumulative evidence
linking determinants of behaviour to behaviour change techniques in the behaviour of healthcare
professionals (McSharry et al., 2016b ).
Frameworks such as the TDF have also been applied in systematic reviews to synthesise barriers
and enablers to healthcare practitioner behaviour change across clinical settings to infer which bar-riers and enablers the interventions in the review appeared to be targeting (Heslehurst et al., 2014 ;
Little et al., 2015 ). Applying a behaviour change theory-informed framework such as the TDF to syn-
thesise barriers across studies in a review provides a theory-informed basis for systematically select-ing BCTs to propose candidate interventions components to address identi ﬁed barriers/enablers to
healthcare professional change.
There remains room for health psychology to further contribute to evidence synthesis in
implementation science. Complex interventions often include multiple BCTs yet to date, meta-regressions have typically examined the e ﬀects of single BCTs in isolation, rather than proposing
and testing theory-linked combinations of BCTs. Recent advances in analytical methods are availableto enable such investigations including Meta-CART (Dusseldorp et al., 2014 ) and Bayesian hierarch-
ical meta-regression (Ivers et al., 2014b ). Such tools developed to review existing literatures have
taken root within implementation science to further understand the inner workings of interventionsto change healthcare professional behaviours.
A challenge of meta regression-based approaches is the complex nature of interventions included
in such reviews. Often, multiple behaviour change techniques, methods and functions are combinedsuch that the eﬀ ect of any given technique is challenging to unpack in relation to co-occurring tech-
niques (Peters et al., 2015 ). Design solutions are needed to tease apart the individual and interacting
techniques experimentally, such as between- and within-person factorial and fractional factorialdesigns (Collins, 2018 ), and could inform evidence syntheses focused on these speci ﬁc mechanisms.
Greater international coordination would help in understanding and synthesising which behaviour
change techniques –individually and in combination –are
eﬀ ective under which conditions (Armi-
tage et al., in press ).
Using implementation science to enhance the real-world impact of health
behaviour change interventions
Health psychology and related disciplines have contributed much to implementation science in
terms of theory and methods for developing, evaluating and synthesising interventions to changehealthcare professional behaviours. Further interchange between the disciplines has the potential34 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
to advance implementation science and expand health psychology’ s traditional remit of research
activities to a greater focus on the behaviour of those who are in a position to deliver the health
behaviour change interventions are being designed and tested in routine health settings. Health
psychology has untapped potential for more widespread impact. Opportunities abound for those
interested in focusing on healthcare professional behaviour change. A number of advances inimplementation science could readily inform health psychology, and for some, may have already:
clarifying behaviour change evidence-practice gaps, theories/models/frameworks from implemen-
tation science to inform health psychology theory, the role of context, stakeholder engagement,and implementation laboratories.
Clarifying behaviour change evidence-practice gaps
Often, a starting point for implementation research is a systematic review demonstrating the e ﬀec-
tiveness of an intervention across settings, combined with an indication of gaps between thisresearch evidence and current practice in the health care system (Graham et al., 2006 ). This approach
could be applied to evidence of health behaviour change interventions. For instance, French et al.(2014 ) showed that across 24 studies of interventions targeting self-e ﬃcacy to increase physical
activity in older adults, interventions led to a small but potentially clinically important e ﬀect on phys-
ical activity. They also identi ﬁed particular BCTs were associated with greater or lesser physical
activity in this population. Disseminating these ﬁndings is only one side of the equation and likely
does not ensure ﬁndings will be used in practice. The other side involves clarifying whether and
to what extent health care professionals currently deliver such interventions in practice. A concertedeﬀort to identify and demonstrate health behaviour change evidence-practice gaps (see ﬁndings in
Table 1 for a potential starting point) could form a robust basis for prioritising the development of
implementation interventions.
Theories, models and frameworks from implementation science to inform health
psychology
While health psychology has provided tools and resources to implementation science, the latter also
draws on other disciplines beyond those informed by psychology as well as the ﬁeld itself for other
complementary frameworks, theories and models (Nilsen, 2015 ). As health psychologists shift to
designing and evaluating the implementation of e ﬀective behaviour change interventions in
routine care, it may be worthwhile to collaborate with implementation scientists to leverage comp-
lementary theories. The breadth of theories and frameworks used in implementation science is suc-cinctly summarised by Nilsen ( 2015 ), who classi ﬁedﬁve key categories of theories, models, and
frameworks from a range of ﬁelds and disciplines. These are identi ﬁed and organised according
to overarching aims and primary function: process models where the focus is on translating researchinto practice (e.g., the Knowledge to Action Framework; Graham et al., 2006 ); determinant frame-
works to capture organisational and individual factors that act as barriers and enablers andinﬂuence implementation (e.g., Greenhalgh’ s model of di ﬀusion of innovations in organisations;
Greenhalgh et al., 2004 ; Consolidated Framework for Implementation Research [CFIR]; Damschroder
et al., 2009 ; and Ferlie and Shortell’ s,2001 Framework); classic theories (e.g., social cognition models)
and implementation theories (e.g., Normalization Process Theory; May et al., 2009 ; theory of organ-
isational readiness for change; Weiner, 2009 ) and evaluation frameworks to assess reach, e ﬃcacy/
eﬀectiveness, adoption, implementation and maintenance (e.g., RE-AIM; Glasgow et al., 1999 ; and
Precede-Proceed; Green & Kreuter, 2005 ) that enable researchers to form conclusions on how the
broader context in ﬂuences the delivery of the intervention. The challenge remains in identifying
which criteria justify the selection of a given theoretical model and framework (Sniehotta et al.,2015 ) and tools are emerging to aid in de ﬁning such criteria to help theory selection (Birken
et al., 2018 ).HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 35
The role of context
A common thread running through many implementation science frameworks, theories and models
is the emphasis placed on the role of context in in ﬂuencing behaviour change. Context can be
deﬁned as anything external to an intervention, including the physical, social, political, economic
environments, that may hinder or facilitate delivery and receipt, or in ﬂuence intervention eﬀ ects
(Squires et al., 2015 ). Contexts vary and boundaries are often blurred between external context
and interventions delivered in applied settings (Pfadenhauer et al., 2017 ). Implementation science ’s
use of the TDF explicitly recognises contextual determinants of behaviour in two of its 14 theoretical
domains: ‘social in ﬂuences ’(e.g., social norms, organisational culture/climate, inter-group con ﬂict)
and ‘environmental context and resources ’(e.g., person x environment interactions, environmental
stressors), representing social and physical setting context factors. Such frameworks have beenapplied in qualitative process evaluations of implementation interventions to understand how
context may impact on observed trial outcomes (Lorencatto et al., 2016 ). Curran et al. ( 2013 ) con-
ducted a retrospective TDF-based qualitative process evaluation of a trial evaluating an intervention
aiming to change clinician behaviour in terms of their use of computer tomography (CT) in adult
patients with minor head injury. Contextual barriers were identi ﬁed, including how the physical
and organisational context of emergency practice (e.g., patient ﬂow, overcrowded/busy department)
inﬂuenced their CT use (e.g., during a busy shift, use of the rule was seen to either slow down or
improve momentum).
Implementation frameworks acknowledge the importance of context and provide speci ﬁc con-
structs to address di ﬀerent aspects of context. For instance, originating from the organisational and
policy literature (Damschroder et al., 2009 ), CFIR recognises the multiple, interacting levels at which
context can in ﬂuence behaviour change, including: outer context (e.g., patient and resources), inner
context (i.e., organisational culture and leadership), and individual context (i.e., re ﬂection, readiness
for change). These frameworks di ﬀer in what they argue constitutes context, and no one framework
alone may be su ﬃciently inclusive or comprehensive. It is perhaps unsurprising that a number of
studies in implementation science are combining frameworks, such as the TDF + CFIR, to more com-prehensively investigate contextual determinants of behaviour change (Birken et al., 2017 ). While
some elements of context are described in the BCW and Intervention Mapping as well, further multi-
disciplinary, integrated approaches to investigating context are needed.
Stakeholder engagement
As health psychology research increasingly utilises patient and public involvement (PPI) strategies,there is potential to learn from examples of how to further embed the input of key stakeholders
in addition to patients and members of the public at all stages of the research process (Byrne,2019 ). Research focusing on the role of PPI in implementation research and health services
research more generally has helpfully highlighted key factors that predict productive and auth-entic contributions to the research process (Gray-Burrows et al., 2018 ). An example of how PPI
approaches can be woven into health psychology is demonstrated in the diabetes prioritisation
work reported by McSharry and colleagues ( 2016a ). Researchers engaged with a wide range of
stakeholders –people with diabetes, healthcare professionals and policy makers –to collate
opinions on what they thought were the most important target behaviours for research, withﬁndings used to frame future research. Such approaches can inform both early and latter
phases of research. For instance, involving health care professionals and health system stake-
holders (managers, policymakers) as early as possible and throughout all phases of the research
is a staple of implementation research that could further be adopted within health psychology to
ensure greater likelihood of impact (as advocated within the BCW and Intervention Mappingapproaches).36 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Implementation laboratories
Securing resources to conduct research at scale, and di ﬃculty in recruiting and retaining participants
to ensure studies are su ﬃciently powered, is a common problem in health psychology. One solution
proposed by the implementation science literature is to embed research within healthcare systems
through ‘implementation laboratories’ (Grimshaw et al., 2019 ; Ivers & Grimshaw, 2016 ; Wolfenden
et al., 2017 ). Implementation laboratories involve close relationships between research teams and
health systems that are already delivering interventions at scale to allow research to be conductedwithin existing large-scale initiatives and infrastructures. The ‘laboratory ’component can allow for
randomisation of interventions at large scale and rapid embedding of e ﬀective interventions as
a new standard of care. As a vehicle for promoting impact, implementation laboratories providean opportunity to rigorously test behaviour change approaches from health psychology with
larger and generalisable samples than possible or feasible by research teams working in isolation.
Implementation laboratories present an opportunity for methodological innovations, such as
novel trial designs, and to reduce the cost of research by utilising existing infrastructures. The AFFI-NITIE programme is an example of embedding and testing behavioural interventions informed by
health psychology theory and frameworks at scale through a collaboration between UK NationalHealth Service and health psychology researchers (Gould et al., 2014 ; Hartley et al., 2017 ), as is
the international Audit and Feedback Meta-Lab (Grimshaw et al., 2019 ).
The capacity of an intervention to be scaled-up and implemented in di ﬀerent organisations and
locations/jurisdictions is another key research question in implementation science. A review synthe-
sising evidence on scaling up public health interventions into population-wide policy and practice
identi ﬁed eight existing frameworks with an explicit focus on scaling up interventions. Across frame-
works, Milat and colleagues ( 2012 ) identi ﬁed a number of key success factors for scaling up including
establishing monitoring and evaluation systems, costing and economic modelling of interventionapproaches, active engagement of a range of implementers and the target community, tailoringthe scaled-up approach to the local context, use of participatory approaches, systematic use of evi-
dence, infrastructure to support implementation, strong leadership and champions, political will,
well de ﬁned scale-up strategy and strong advocacy. The importance of these factors to scalability
and impact is recognised from the start and routinely considered in implementation science
when designing and evaluating interventions.
Future directions
Health psychology has contributed much to the development of implementation science, but the
degree of synergy between ﬁelds remains unclear. To enhance the opportunities aﬀ orded by
greater linkage, we propose a set of practical recommendations for how implementation sciencecan further inform health psychology (see Table 3) and how health psychology could further
inform implementation science (see Table 4 ).
Health psychology is replete with examples of rigorous studies of health behaviour change inter-
ventions synthesised in systematic reviews that hold the promise of making a true impact on thehealth and well-being of patients and populations (see Table 1). However, health psychologists
may not yet be following-through to ensure this impact. It is not clear how many and whichhealth behaviour change interventions are being implemented into routine care or are ready tobe the focus of concerted implementation research. Future research could focus on identifying
these behaviour change evidence-practice gaps.
Studying healthcare professional behaviour change presents at least two new opportunities for
health psychologists: (a) to promote greater impact of evidence-based health behaviour changeinterventions by using approaches from health psychology to support the adoption, implementation
and sustained use of that intervention beyond the study it was tested in, and (b) to test behaviour
change theories and methods in an under-researched set of health-related behaviours. The settingsHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 37
Table 3. Guidance for how implementation science has and can further inform health psychology.
Recommendation 1
Enhance systematic review conduct and reporting of health behaviour change interventions
by including a discussion on implementation readiness(1a) Systematic reviews of randomised trials and experiments of health behaviour change
interventions should discuss the implementation-readiness of the synthesised evidence (e.g.,adding an ‘implications for implementation ’section).
(1b) Systematic reviews of randomised trials and experiments of health behaviour change
interventions should distinguish between eﬃ cacy (i.e., under ideal conditions) and e ﬀectiveness
(i.e., under real-world conditions) trials to inform the readiness for implementation.
Recommendation 2
Consider implementation (outside the setting of the experiment itself, delivered by someone
outside the research team) as early as possible(2a) Assess potential barriers and enablers to implementation as early as possible (ideally
concurrently with behaviour change intervention development) to identify feasibility of deliveryand indicate implementation support needs
(2b) Consider the implications of infrastructure, resources and competing demands of those who
would be tasked with implementing a health behaviour change intervention
Recommendation 3
Extend and develop the science of health behaviour change to understanding and changing
the behaviour of actors at multiple levels that enable and deliver health behaviour changeinterventions in practice(3a) Consider the behaviours involved in the delivery of the health behaviour change intervention
into routine care as target behaviours to understand and change in themselves within healthpsychology
(3b) Apply behaviour and behaviour change theories, models and frameworks for understanding
and developing interventions to change the behaviour of the organisational actors delivering
health behaviour change interventions in practice
(3c) Test the utility boundaries of theories and methods developed within health psychology and
behavioural science on the behaviour/behaviour change of organisational actors
(3d) Test theories head to head to prioritise which may be most useful under which circumstances(3e) Draw from implementation science theories and evidence to enhance existing and/or develop
novel theories of behaviour change that could be applied to health behaviours of patients and
the public, including aspects of scale and spread of interventions and the role of complexity andcontext
(3f) Given the multitude of theories, models and frameworks from which to select, consider
applying tools for selecting and justifying the selection of and (if relevant) further developmentof existing theories to avoid theory fragmentation and proliferation
Recommendation 4
Develop implementation science capacity within health psychology(4a) Incorporate implementation science into health psychology training to develop capacity
(4b) Involve implementation science expertise in health psychology and behavioural medicine
societies, including special interest groups
(4c) Partner with implementation researchers, scientists and practitioners who can lead on
implementation while being aware of health behaviour change being developed.
(4d) Develop educational opportunities and paid positions for health psychologists to be
embedded in health service settings
(4e) Demonstrate rigorous implementation research of health behaviour change interventions in
health psychology journals, including use of special issues
(4f) Enhance editorial boards of health psychology and behavioural medicine journals with health
psychologists with implementation science expertise
(4g) Develop national and cross-national funding streams for promoting collaboration (e.g.,
research visits, studentships, fellowships, targeted operating grants)38 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Table 4. Guidance for how health psychology has and can further inform implementation science.
Recommendation 1
Identify whose behaviour(s) and which behaviour(s), at which organisational level need to
change to implement an evidence-based intervention into practice(1a) Consider organisational actors (health providers, middle managers, leadership) and wider
actors in the outer setting (government, other organisations) as involving people needing tochange their behaviour to implement an evidence-based intervention in practice
(1b) Specify the behaviour(s) of organisational actor(s) implementing an evidence-based
intervention into routine care as well as the behaviour of other organisational actors that
enable intervention delivery
(1c) Use existing tools to enhance the speci ﬁcity and priority of whose behaviour and which
behaviour should be targeted to inform identi ﬁcation and development of process and
outcome measures for qualitative and quantitative implementation evaluation
(1d) Rather than being synonymous with an individual-level approach, broaden the scope of
behaviour change approaches in implementation to involve change in multiple people ’s
behaviour at multiple levels
(1e) Explore the role of context as a function of the behaviours that have been shaped by, and
could be further shaped by, the behaviour of people operating at di ﬀerent organisational and
societal levels over time
Recommendation 2
When considering de-implementation of low value care, draw upon behaviour change theoriesand methods that describe reducing, replacing and/or stopping a behaviour to develop
cumulative theory and evidence for de-implementation(2a) Apply behaviour change techniques and theory speci ﬁc to reducing and stopping a
behaviour
(2b) Consider the implications that replacement and substitution behaviours have for the existing
behaviour(s) being replaced (de-implemented) and new behaviour being implemented in itsplace
(2c) Consider the role of the physical and social setting in maintaining low-value care through
automatic and habitual processes triggered by the setting and people within it
Recommendation 3
Draw upon theories and methods of behaviour change that describe how change is maintainedand sustained over time(3a) Apply behaviour change techniques and theory speci ﬁc to ensuring that change is
maintained over-time and factors associated with sustained change that may di ﬀer from
factors associated with generating change
(3b) Consider the role of both re ﬂective decision processes as well as automatic habitual and
aﬀective processes in developing implementation interventions designed to be sustained and
maintained over time
Recommendation 4
Draw upon theory and methods from health psychology to empirically investigate the ﬁdelity
and mechanisms of change of implementation interventions(4a) Draw upon methods for using theory to evaluate whether implementation interventions
show change in process measures and whether such changes are associated withimplementation outcomes (theory-based mechanisms of change)
(4b) Draw upon methods for using theory and consistent terminology for clarifying the content
(techniques and strategies) of implementation interventions to investigate ﬁdelity of delivery
and receipt
Recommendation 5
Develop health psychology capacity within implementation science(5a) Involve and fund behaviour change expertise in implementation research and practice(5b) Incorporate principles of health psychology and behavioural science as part of emerging
multidisciplinary implementation science training worldwide
(5c) Develop national and cross-national funding streams for promoting collaboration (e.g.,
research visits, studentships, fellowships, targeted operating grants)HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 39
of interest to implementation science o ﬀer an opportunity to test and apply existing theories of
behaviour and the potential to advance theory. For instance, traditionally, theories of behaviour
applied in implementation science conceptualised healthcare professionals ’behaviour as a
product of a re ﬂective decision-making process (Godin et al., 2008 ). Dual process models propose
that healthcare professional behaviour is driven by two parallel processes: a reﬂ ective process
that is slow and e ﬀortful, and an impulsive process that operates fast and e ﬃciently outside con-
scious awareness (Strack & Deutsch, 2004 ). Studies have applied and tested dual-process models
in healthcare professionals (Pottho ﬀet al., 2019 ) demonstrating the potential role the impulsive
process in health professional behaviour.
Implementation intentions (Gollwitzer, 1999 ) are a mainstay of health psychology (Hagger et al.,
2016 ; Hagger & Luszczynska, 2014 ) and a recognised means for accessing the impulsive process to
promote behaviour change. This technique could be used to change healthcare professional behav-
iour, e.g., to improve hand-hygiene adherence in nurses. A systematic review of all implementation
intentions studies aiming to change health behaviours also sought to identify interventions target-ing healthcare professional behaviours (Squires et al., 2013 ). There remains much untapped potential
here.
Another emerging area of theorising in healt h psychology involves developing theory to
account for multiple behaviours (Albarracín et al., 2018 ; Conner et al., 2016 ;F l e i ge ta l . ,2015;
Nudelman et al., 2018). These developments readily generalise to implementation science,
where healthcare professionals perform multip le behaviours competing for limited time (Jaén
et al., 1994 ; Presseau et al., 2009). Most theories of behaviour change focus on explaining a
single behaviour, however, healthcare professionals (and patients and members of the public)pursue multiple goals, some of which are compatible and others, less so. Moving from asingle- to a multiple-behaviour paradigm could improve the description of clinical behaviours
and design of interventions.
Strengths and limitations
While endeavouring to represent multiple international traditions, the breadth of topics covered in
the present conceptual review necessarily meant narrowing to speci ﬁc contemporary examples
rather than seeking to comprehensively represent all approaches. Nevertheless, we juxtaposed anumber of research approaches for the ﬁrst time. However, not all approaches are represented
and we hope instead that the present review serves to catalyse broader discussion and synergy span-
ning other approaches, and more in-depth reviews within each of the broad topics covered herein.
Furthermore, while we highlighted contemporary theories and approaches, we recognise that theapproaches covered do not necessarily stem from health psychology and implementation them-
selves, and that the boundaries between disciplines often become less important when moving
to more multi- and interdisciplinary approaches.
Conclusions
There is much promise in expanding the remit of health psychology to consider changing not onlythe behaviours of patients and the public but also the behaviours of those who routinely deliverinterventions targeting patients/public and other actors in the broader health system. Doing so pro-
vides an array of theories and methods used within health psychology that can be applied, chal-
lenged and enhanced through application to healthcare provider behaviour change.Implementation can thus be studied as a behaviour change intervention itself. There is much litera-
ture to support health psychologists in doing this already, and implementation science has much to
oﬀer to the systematic implementation of health psychology interventions for impact. The potential
is clear; it is time to follow-through.40 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Acknowledgements
This article was developed during the SYNERGY expert meeting as part of the 2017 Synergy Expert Meeting ( www.ehps.
net/synergy/expert-meetings/ ). The meeting brought together health psychologists with experience and expertise in
implementation science to consider how health psychology has contributed to implementation science to date, and
how it might draw from it to move towards greater impact. We are grateful to Andrea Patey for discussions on an
earlier version of the manuscript. We are grateful to the EHPS for providing the space for advancing the discussionon the links between health psychology and implementation science. Author contributions: All authors contributed
to conceptualising the original idea and goals and aims. JP, AD, LBD, GtH, and ET contributed to the methodology,
screening and analysis of the systematic review. JP, MB, SP, AvD, ALD, RP, SH, JH, DF, JMcS, KH, FL, NH, ET, LBD, EB,
and GtH led the original draft. JP, MB, SP, AvD, ALD, EKO, RP, SH, JH, DF, JMcS, FL, NH, ET, LBD, SvL, LA, EB, GtH, and
DK contributed to reviewing and editing. JP, MB, SP, SH, FL, and LBD provided overall supervision and oversight. Allauthors reviewed and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Disclosure statement
No potential conﬂ ict of interest was reported by the author(s).
Funding
Molly Byrne is funded through a Health Research Board Research Leadership Award.
ORCID
Justin Presseau http://orcid.org/0000-0002-2132-0703
Sarah Hotham http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5525-3254
Sebastian Pottho ﬀ http://orcid.org/0000-0003-4580-8532
Lou Atkinson http://orcid.org/0000-0003-1613-3791
Eleanor Bull http://orcid.org/0000-0002-9444-0597
Alexandra L. Dima http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3106-2242
Anne van Dongen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0644-0790
David French http://orcid.org/0000-0002-7663-7804
Nelli Hankonen http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8464-2478
Gill ten Hoor http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5500-1893
Jo Hart http://orcid.org/0000-0001-9985-5137
Dominika Kwasnicka http://orcid.org/0000-0002-5961-837X
Sanne van Lieshout http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3743-5775
Jennifer McSharry http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5459-1588
Ellinor K. Olander http://orcid.org/0000-0001-7792-9895
Rachael Powell http://orcid.org/0000-0002-8023-8873
Elaine Toomey http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5941-0838
Molly Byrne http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8900-4320
References
Abraham, C., & Graham-Rowe, E. ( 2009 ). Are worksite interventions e ﬀective in increasing physical activity? A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 3(1), 108 –144. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437190903151096
Adriaanse, M. A., Vinkers, C. D. W., De Ridder, D. T. D., Hox, J. J., & De Wit, J. B. F. ( 2011 ). Do implementation intentions
help to eat a healthy diet? A systematic review and meta-analysis of the empirical evidence. Appetite ,56(1), 183 –193.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appet.2010.10.012
Ajzen, I. ( 1991 ). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes ,50(2), 179 –211.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020-T
Albarracín, D., Wilson, K., Chan, M. S., Durantini, M., & Sanchez, F. ( 2018 ). Action and inaction in multi-behaviour rec-
ommendations: A meta-analysis of lifestyle interventions. Health Psychology Review ,12(1), 1 –24.https://doi.org/10.
1080/17437199.2017.1369140
Allom, V., Mullan, B., & Hagger, M. ( 2016 ). Does inhibitory control training improve health behaviour? A meta-analysis.
Health Psychology Review, 10(2), 168 –186. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1051078HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 41
Araújo-Soares, V., Hankonen, N., Presseau, J., Rodrigues, A., & Sniehotta, F. F. ( 2019 ). Developing behavior change inter-
ventions for self-management in chronic Illness: An integrative overview. European Psychologist ,24(1), 7 –25.https://
doi.org/10.1027/1016-9040/a000330
Armitage, C. J., Conner, M., Prestwich, A., Bruin, M., Johnston, M., Sniehotta, F., & Epton, T. ( in press ). Investigating which
behaviour change techniques work for whom in which contexts delivered by what means: Proposal for an inter-
national collaboratory of Centres for Understanding Behaviour Change (CUBiC). British Journal of Health
Psychology, Bjhp ,12479 .https://doi.org/10.1111/bjhp.12479
Atkins, L., Francis, J. J., Islam, R., O ’Connor, D., Patey, A., Ivers, N. M., Foy, R., Duncan, E. M., Colquhoun, H., Grimshaw, J. M.,
Lawton, R., & Michie, S. ( 2017 ). A guide to using the theoretical domains framework of behaviour change to inves-
tigate implementation problems. Implementation Science ,12(1), 77. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-017-0605-9
Aulbach, M. B., Knittle, K., & Haukkala, A. ( 2019 ). Implicit process interventions in eating behaviour: A meta-analysis
examining mediators and moderators. Health Psychology Review, 13(2), 179 –208. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17437199.2019.1571933
Bartholomew, L. K., Parcel, G. S., Kok, G., & Gottlieb, N. H. (eds.). ( 2001 ).Intervention mapping: Designing theory- and evi-
dence-based health promotion programs . Mayﬁ eld Pub. Co.
Bartholomew Eldredge, L. K., Markham, C. M., Ruiter, R. A. C., Fernández, M. E., Kok, G., & Parcel, G. S. (2016 ).Planning
health promotion programs: An intervention mapping approach (4th ed.). Jossey-Bass & Pfeiﬀ er Imprints, Wiley.
Beenstock, J., Sniehotta, F. F., White, M., Bell, R., Milne, E. M., & Araujo-Soares, V. ( 2012 ). What helps and hinders midwives
in engaging with pregnant women about stopping smoking? A cross-sectional survey of perceived implementation
diﬃculties among midwives in the North East of England. Implementation Science ,7(1), 36. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1748-5908-7-36
Bélanger-Gravel, A., Godin, G., & Amireault, S. ( 2013 ). A meta-analytic review of the e ﬀect of implementation intentions
on physical activity. Health Psychology Review, 7(1), 23 –54.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2011.560095
Bellg, A. J., Borrelli, B., Resnick, B., Hecht, J., Minicucci, D. S., Ory, M., Ogedegbe, G., Orwig, D., Ernst, D., Czajkowski, S., &
Treatment Fidelity Workgroup of the NIH Behavior Change Consortium. ( 2004 ). Enhancing treatment ﬁdelity in
health behavior change studies: Best practices and recommendations from the NIH behavior change consortium.
Health Psychology ,23(5), 443 –451. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-6133.23.5.443
Benn,
Y., Webb, T. L., Chang, B. P. I., & Harkin, B. ( 2016 ). What is the psychological impact of self-weighing? A meta-analy-
sis.Health Psychology Review, 10(2), 187 –203. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2016.1138871
Birken, S. A., Powell, B. J., Presseau, J., Kirk, M. A., Lorencatto, F., Gould, N. J., Shea, C. M., Weiner, B. J., Francis, J. J., Yu, Y.,
Haines, E., & Damschroder, L. J. ( 2017 ). Combined use of the consolidated framework for implementation research
(CFIR) and the theoretical domains framework (TDF): A systematic review. Implementation Science ,12(1), 2. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13012-016-0534-z
Birken, S. A., Rohweder, C. L., Powell, B. J., Shea, C. M., Scott, J., Leeman, J., Grewe, M. E., Alexis Kirk, M., Damschroder, L.,
Aldridge, W. A., Haines, E. R., Straus, S., & Presseau, J. ( 2018 ). T-CaST: An implementation theory comparison and selec-
tion tool. Implementation Science ,13(1), 143. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-018-0836-4
Black, N., Mullan, B., & Sharpe, L. ( 2016 ). Computer-delivered interventions for reducing alcohol consumption: Meta-
analysis and meta-regression using behaviour change techniques and theory. Health Psychology Review ,10(3),
341–357. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2016.1168268
Borrelli, B. ( 2011 ). The assessment, monitoring, and enhancement of treatment ﬁdelity in public health clinical trials:
Treatment ﬁdelity in clinical trials. Journal of Public Health Dentistry, 71, S52 –S63. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-
7325.2011.00233.x
Bosch, M., McKenzie, J. E., Mortimer, D., Tavender, E. J., Francis, J. J., Brennan, S. E., Knott, J. C., Ponsford, J. L., Pearce, A.,
O’Connor, D. A., Grimshaw, J. M., Rosenfeld, J. V., Gruen, R. L., Green, S. E., & NET Program. ( 2014 ). Implementing evi-
dence-based recommended practices for the management of patients with mild traumatic brain injuries in
Australian emergency care departments: Study protocol for a cluster randomised controlled trial. Trials ,15(1), 281.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1745-6215-15-281
Bull, E. R., Hart, J. K., Swift, J., Baxter, K., McLauchlan, N., Joseph, S., & Byrne-Davis, L. M. T. ( 2019 ). An organisational par-
ticipatory research study of the feasibility of the behaviour change wheel to support clinical teams implementing
new models of care. BMC Health Services Research ,19(1).https://doi.org/10.1186/s12913-019-3885-8
Byrne, M. ( 2019 ). Increasing the impact of behaviour change intervention research: Is there a role for stakeholder
engagement? Health Psychology ,38(4), 290 –296. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000723
Cameron, D. S., Bertenshaw, E. J., & Sheeran, P. ( 2015 ). The impact of positive aﬀ ect on health cognitions and behaviours:
A meta-analysis of the experimental evidence. Health Psychology Review, 9(3), 345 –365. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17437199.2014.923164
Cane, J., O ’Connor, D., & Michie, S. ( 2012 ). Validation of the theoretical domains framework for use in behaviour change
and implementation research. Implementation Science ,7(1), 37. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-7-37
Caperon, L., Sykes-Muskett, B., Clancy, F., Newell, J., King, R., & Prestwich, A. ( 2018 ). How e ﬀective are interventions in
improving dietary behaviour in low- and middle-income countries? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health
Psychology Review, 12(3), 312 –331. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.148176342 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Carr, R. M., Prestwich, A., Kwasnicka, D., Thøgersen-Ntoumani, C., Gucciardi, D. F., Quested, E., Hall, L. H., & Ntoumanis, N.
(2019 ). Dyadic interventions to promote physical activity and reduce sedentary behaviour: Systematic review and
meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 13(1), 91 –109. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1532312
Carroll, C., Patterson, M., Wood, S., Booth, A., Rick, J., & Balain, S. ( 2007 ). A conceptual framework for implementation
ﬁdelity. Implementation Science ,2(1), 40. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-2-40
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. ( 1982 ). Control theory: A useful conceptual framework for personality-social, clinical, and
health psychology. Psychological Bulletin ,92(1), 111 –135. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.92.1.111
Centre for Behaviour Change. ( 2019 , April 15). Theory and techniques tool . Theory and Techniques Tool. https://
theoryandtechniquetool.humanbehaviourchange.org/
Collins, L. M. ( 2018 ).Optimization of behavioral, biobehavioral, and biomedical interventions: The multiphase optimization
strategy (MOST) . Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-72206-1
Colquhoun, H., Michie, S., Sales, A., Ivers, N., Grimshaw, J. M., Carroll, K., Chalifoux, M., Eva, K., & Brehaut, J. ( 2017 ).
Reporting and design elements of audit and feedback interventions: A secondary review: Table 1. BMJ Quality &
Safety ,26(1), 54 –60.https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2015-005004
Conner, M., Abraham, C., Prestwich, A., Hutter, R., Hallam, J., Sykes-Muskett, B., Morris, B., & Hurling, R. ( 2016 ). Impact of
goal priority and goal conﬂ ict on the intention –health-behavior relationship: Tests on physical activity and other
health behaviors. Health Psychology ,35(9), 1017 –1026. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000340
Cross, A., & She ﬃeld, D. ( 2019 ). Mental contrasting for health behaviour change: A systematic review and meta-analysis
of eﬀects and moderator variables. Health Psychology Review, 13(2), 209 –225. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.
2019.1594332
Curran, J. A., Brehaut, J., Patey, A. M., Osmond, M., Stiell, I., & Grimshaw, J. M. (2013 ). Understanding the Canadian adult
CT head rule trial: Use of the theoretical domains framework for process evaluation. Implementation Science ,8(1), 25.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-8-25
Damschroder, L. J., Aron, D. C., Keith, R. E., Kirsh, S. R., Alexander, J. A., & Lowery, J. C. ( 2009 ). Fostering implementation of
health services research ﬁndings into practice: A consolidated framework for advancing implementation science.
Implementation Science ,4(1), 50. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-4-50
Davey, P., Marwick, C. A., Scott, C. L., Charani, E., McNeil, K., Brown, E., Gould, I. M., Ramsay, C. R., & Michie, S. ( 2017 ).
Interventions to improve antibiotic prescribing practices for hospital inpatients. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews .https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003543.pub4
Davidoﬀ , F., Dixon-Woods, M., Leviton, L., & Michie, S. ( 2015 ). Demystifying theory and its use in improvement. BMJ
Quality & Safety ,24(3), 228 –238. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2014-003627
Davie, P., Chilcot, J., Chang, Y.-S., Norton, S., Hughes, L. D., & Bick, D. ( 2019 ). Eﬀectiveness of social-psychological inter-
ventions at promoting breastfeeding initiation, duration and exclusivity: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Health Psychology Review,1 –37.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1630293
Davies, P., Walker, A. E., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2010 ). A systematic review of the use of theory in the design of guideline
dissemination and implementation strategies and interpretation of the results of rigorous evaluations.Implementation Science ,5(1), 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-5-14
de Bruin, M., Dima, A. L., Texier, N., & van Ganse, E. ( 2018 ). Explaining the amount and consistency of medical care and
self-management support in Asthma: A survey of primary care providers in France and the United Kingdom. The
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: In Practice ,6(6), 1916 –1925.e7. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jaip.2018.04.039
Desveaux, L., Gomes, T., Tadrous, M., Je ﬀs, L., Taljaard, M., Rogers, J., Bell, C. M., & Ivers, N. M. ( 2015 ). Appropriate pre-
scribing in nursing homes demonstration project (APDP) study protocol: Pragmatic, cluster-randomized trial and
mixed methods process evaluation of an Ontario policy-maker initiative to improve appropriate prescribing of anti-psychotics. Implementation Science ,11(1), 45. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-016-0410-x
Dixon-Woods, M., Leslie, M., Tarrant, C., & Bion, J. ( 2013 ). Explaining Matching Michigan: An ethnographic study of a
patient safety program. Implementation Science ,8(1), 70. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-8-70
Dombrowski, S. U., Sniehotta, F. F., Avenell, A., Johnston, M., MacLennan, G., & Araújo-Soares, V. ( 2012 ). Identifying active
ingredients in complex behavioural interventions for obese adults with obesity-related co-morbidities or additionalrisk factors for co-morbidities: a systematic review. Health Psychology Review, 6(1), 7 –32.https://doi.org/10.1080/
17437199.2010.513298
Duncan, E. M., Charani, E., Clarkson, J. E., Francis, J. J., Gillies, K., Grimshaw, J. M., Kern, W. V., Lorencatto, F., Marwick, C. A.,
McEwen, J., Möhler, R., Morris, A. M., Ramsay, C. R., Rogers Van Katwyk, S., Rzewuska, M., Skodvin, B., Smith, I., Suh, K.
N., & Davey, P. G. ( 2020 ). A behavioural approach to specifying interventions: What insights can be gained for the
reporting and implementation of interventions to reduce antibiotic use in hospitals? Journal
 of Antimicrobial
Chemotherapy ,75(5), 1338 –1346. https://doi.org/10.1093/jac/dkaa001
Durks, D., Fernandez-Llimos, F., Hossain, L. N., Franco-Trigo, L., Benrimoj, S. I., & Sabater-Hernández, D. ( 2017 ). Use of
intervention mapping to enhance health care professional practice: A systematic review. Health Education &
Behavior ,44(4), 524 –535. https://doi.org/10.1177/1090198117709885
Dusseldorp, E., van Genugten, L., van Buuren, S., Verheijden, M. W., & van Empelen, P. ( 2014 ). Combinations of tech-
niques that e ﬀectively change health behavior: Evidence from meta-CART analysis. Health Psychology ,33(12),
1530 –1540. https://doi.org/10.1037/hea0000018HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 43
Eccles, M. P., Grimshaw, J., Walker, A., Johnston, M., & Pitts, N. ( 2005 ). Changing the behavior of healthcare professionals:
The use of theory in promoting the uptake of research ﬁndings. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology ,58(2), 107 –112.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2004.09.002
Eccles, M. P., & Mittman, B. S. ( 2006 ). Welcome to implementation science. Implementation Science ,1(1), 1. https://doi.
org/10.1186/1748-5908-1-1
Ferlie, E. B., & Shortell, S. M. ( 2001 ). Improving the quality of health care in the United Kingdom and the United States: A
framework for change. The Milbank Quarterly ,79(2), 281 –315. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-0009.00206
Fernandez, M. E., ten Hoor, G. A., van Lieshout, S., Rodriguez, S. A., Beidas, R. S., Parcel, G., Ruiter, R. A., Markham, C. M., &
Kok, G. ( 2019 ). Implementation mapping: Using intervention mapping to develop implementation strategies.
Frontiers in Public Health ,7.https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2019.00158
Fishbein, M. (ed.). ( 1967 ). Attitude and the prediction of behaviour (Chapter 51). In Readings in attitude theory and
measurement (pp. 477 –492). Wiley.
Fleig, L., Ngo, J., Roman, B., Ntzani, E., Satta, P., Warner, L. M., Schwarzer, R., & Brandi, M. L. ( 2015 ). Beyond single behav-
iour theory: Adding cross-behaviour cognitions to the health action process approach. British Journal of Health
Psychology ,20(4), 824 –841. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjhp.12144
Francis, J. J., Eccles, M. P., Johnston, M., Walker, A., Grimshaw, J., Foy, R., Kaner, E. F., Smith, L., & Bonetti, D. ( 2004 ).
Constructing questionnaires based on the theory of planned behaviour: A manual for health services researchers .
Centre for Health Services Research: University of Newcastle upon Tyne. http://openaccess.city.ac.uk/1735/
Francis, J. J., & Presseau, J. ( 2019 ). Healthcare practitioner behaviour. In C. Llewellyn, S. Ayers, C. McManus, S. Newman, K.
Petrie, T.A. Revenson, & J. Weinman (Eds.), Cambridge Handbook of psychology, health and medicine (3rd ed.).
Cambridge University Press.
French, S. D., Green, S. E., Francis, J. J., Buchbinder, R., O ’Connor, D. A., Grimshaw, J. M., & Michie, S. ( 2015 ). Evaluation of
theﬁdelity of an interactive face-to-face educational intervention to improve general practitioner management of
back pain. BMJ Open ,5(7), e007886. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2015-007886
French, S. D., Green, S. E., O ’Connor, D. A., McKenzie, J. E., Francis, J. J., Michie, S., Buchbinder, R., Schattner, P., Spike, N., &
Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2012 ). Developing theory-informed behaviour change interventions to implement evidence into
practice: A systematic approach using the theoretical domains framework. Implementation Science ,7(1), 38.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-7-38
French,
D. P., Olander, E. K., Chisholm, A., & Mc Sharry, J. ( 2014 ). Which behaviour change techniques are most e ﬀective
at increasing older adults ’self-eﬃcacy and physical activity behaviour? A systematic review. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine ,48(2), 225 –234. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-014-9593-z
Gardner, B., Smith, L., Lorencatto, F., Hamer, M., & Biddle, S. J. ( 2016 ). How to reduce sitting time? A review of behaviour
change strategies used in sedentary behaviour reduction interventions among adults. Health Psychology Review, 10
(1), 89 –112. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1082146
Gardner, B., Whittington, C., McAteer, J., Eccles, M. P., & Michie, S. ( 2010 ). Using theory to synthesise evidence from
behaviour change interventions: The example of audit and feedback. Social Science & Medicine ,70(10), 1618 –
1625. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.01.039
Gilinsky, A. S., Dale, H., Robinson, C., Hughes, A. R., McInnes, R., & Lavallee, D. ( 2015 ). Eﬃcacy of physical activity inter-
ventions in post-natal populations: Systematic review, meta-analysis and content coding of behaviour change tech-
niques. Health Psychology Review ,9(2), 244 –263. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2014.899059
Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., & Boles, S. M. ( 1999 ). Evaluating the public health impact of health promotion interventions:
The RE-AIM framework. American Journal of Public Health ,89(9), 1322 –1327. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.89.9.1322
Godin, G., Bélanger-Gravel, A., Eccles, M. P., & Grimshaw, J. ( 2008 ). Healthcare professionals ’intentions and behaviours: A
systematic review of studies based on social cognitive theories. Implementation Science ,3(1), 36. https://doi.org/10.
1186/1748-5908-3-36
Gollwitzer, P. M. ( 1999 ). Implementation intentions: Strong e ﬀects of simple plans. American Psychologist ,54(7), 493 –
503. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.54.7.493
Gonzalez Salas Duhne, P., Horan, A. J., Ross, C., Webb, T. L., & Hardy, G. E. ( in press ). Assessing and promoting the use of
implementation intentions in clinical practice. Social Science & Medicine .https://doi.org/10.1016/j.socscimed.2020.
113490
Gould, N. J., Lorencatto, F., Stanworth, S. J., Michie, S., Prior, M. E., Glidewell, L., Grimshaw, J. M., & Francis, J. J. ( 2014 ).
Application of theory to enhance audit and feedback interventions to increase the uptake of evidence-based trans-
fusion
practice: An intervention development protocol. Implementation Science ,9(1), 92. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13012-014-0092-1
Gourlan, M., Bernard, P., Bortolon, C., Romain, A. J., Lareyre, O., Carayol, M., Ninot, G., & Boiché, J. ( 2016 ). Eﬃcacy of
theory-based interventions to promote physical activity. A meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Health
Psychology Review, 10(1), 50 –66.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2014.981777
Graham, I. D., Logan, J., Harrison, M. B., Straus, S. E., Tetroe, J., Caswell, W., & Robinson, N. ( 2006 ). Lost in knowledge
translation: Time for a map? Journal of Continuing Education in the Health Professions ,26(1), 13 –24.https://doi.
org/10.1002/chp.4744 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
Gray-Burrows, K. A., Willis, T. A., Foy, R., Rathfelder, M., Bland, P., Chin, A., Hodgson, S., Ibegbuna, G., Prestwich, G., Samuel,
K., Wood, L., Yaqoob, F., & McEachan, R. R. C. (2018 ). Role of patient and public involvement in implementation research:
A consensus study. BMJ Quality & Safety ,27(10), 858 –864. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2017-006954
Green, L. W., & Kreuter, M. W. ( 2005 ).Health program planning: An educational and ecological approach (4th ed.).
McGraw-Hill.
Greenhalgh, T., Robert, G., Macfarlane, F., Bate, P., & Kyriakidou, O. ( 2004 ). Diﬀ usion of innovations in service organiz-
ations: Systematic review and recommendations. The Milbank Quarterly ,82(4), 581 –629. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.
0887-378X.2004.00325.x
Griﬃths, S. E., Parsons, J., Naughton, F., Fulton, E. A., Tombor, I., & Brown, K. E. ( 2018 ). Are digital interventions for
smoking cessation in pregnancy e ﬀective? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 12
(4), 333 –356. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1488602
Grimshaw, J., Ivers, N., Linklater, S., Foy, R., Francis, J. J., Gude, W. T., & Hysong, S. J. ( 2019 ). Reinvigorating stagnant
science: Implementation laboratories and a meta-laboratory to e ﬃciently advance the science of audit and feedback.
BMJ Quality & Safety ,28(5), 416 –423. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjqs-2018-008355
Grimshaw, J. M., Presseau, J., Tetroe, J., Eccles, M. P., Francis, J. J., Godin, G., Graham, I. D., Hux, J. E., Johnston, M., Légaré,
F., Lemyre, L., Robinson, N., Légaré, F., Lemyre, L., Robinson, N., & Zwarenstein, M. (2014 ). Looking inside the black
box: Results of a theory-based process evaluation exploring the results of a randomized controlled trial of printed
educational messages to increase primary care physicians ’diabetic retinopathy referrals [Trial registration number
ISRCTN72772651]. Implementation Science ,9(1), 86. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-9-86
Grimshaw, J. M., Zwarenstein, M., Tetroe, J. M., Godin, G., Graham, I. D., Lemyre, L., Eccles, M. P., Johnston, M., Francis, J. J.,
Hux, J., O ’Rourke, K., Legare, F., & Presseau, J. ( 2007 ). Looking inside the black box: A theory-based process evaluation
alongside a randomised controlled trial of printed educational materials (the Ontario printed educational message,OPEM) to improve referral and prescribing practices in primary care in Ontario, Canada. Implementation Science ,2(1),
38.https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-2-38
Grol, R. ( 2001 ). Successes and failures in the implementation of evidence-based guidelines for clinical practice. Medical
Care ,39, II46 –II54. https://doi.org/10.1097/00005650-200108002-00003
Hagger, M. S., & Chatzisarantis, N. L. D. ( 2014 ). An integrated behavior change model for physical activity. Exercise and
Sport 
Sciences Reviews ,42(2), 62 –69.https://doi.org/10.1249/JES.0000000000000008
Hagger, M. S., & Luszczynska, A. ( 2014 ). Implementation intention and action planning interventions in health contexts:
State of the research and proposals for the way forward: Planning interventions: The way forward. Applied
Psychology: Health and Well-Being ,6(1), 1 –47.https://doi.org/10.1111/aphw.12017
Hagger, M. S., Luszczynska, A., de Wit, J., Benyamini, Y., Burkert, S., Chamberland, P.-E., Chater, A., Dombrowski, S. U., van
Dongen, A., French, D. P., Gauchet, A., Hankonen, N., Karekla, M., Kinney, A. Y., Kwasnicka, D., Hing Lo, S., López-Roig,
S., Meslot, C., Marques, M. M., …Gollwitzer, P. M. ( 2016 ). Implementation intention and planning interventions in
health psychology: Recommendations from the synergy expert group for research and practice. Psychology &
Health ,31(7), 814 –839. https://doi.org/10.1080/08870446.2016.1146719
Hagger, M. S., Moyers, S., McAnally, K., & McKinley, L. E. ( 2020 ). Known knowns and known unknowns on behavior
change interventions and mechanisms of action. Health Psychology Review, 14(1), 199 –212. https://doi.org/10.
1080/17437199.2020.1719184
Hardeman, W., Michie, S., Fanshawe, T., Prevost, A. T., Mcloughlin, K., & Kinmonth, A. L. ( 2008 ). Fidelity of delivery of a
physical activity intervention: Predictors and consequences. Psychology & Health ,23(1), 11 –24.https://doi.org/10.
1080/08870440701615948
Hartley, S., Foy, R., Walwyn, R. E. A., Cicero, R., Farrin, A. J., Francis, J. J., Lorencatto, F., Gould, N. J., Grant-Casey, J.,
Grimshaw, J. M., Glidewell, L., Michie, S., Morris, S., & Stanworth, S. J. ( 2017 ). The evaluation of enhanced feedback
interventions to reduce unnecessary blood transfusions (AFFINITIE): Protocol for two linked cluster randomised fac-
torial controlled trials. Implementation Science ,12(1), 84. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-017-0614-8
Hennessy, E. A., Johnson, B. T., Acabchuk, R. L., McCloskey, K., & Stewart-James, J. ( 2020 ). Self-regulation mechanisms in
health behavior change: A systematic meta-review of meta-analyses, 2006 –2017. Health Psychology Review, 14(1), 6 –
42.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1679654
Heslehurst, N., Newham, J., Maniatopoulos, G., Fleetwood, C., Robalino, S., & Rankin, J. ( 2014 ). Implementation of preg-
nancy weight management and obesity guidelines: A meta-synthesis of healthcare professionals ’barriers and facil-
itators using the theoretical domains framework: Implementing pregnancy weight guidelines. Obesity Reviews ,15(6),
462–486. https://doi.org/10.1111/obr.12160
Huijg, J. M., Gebhardt, W. A., Crone, M. R., Dusseldorp, E., & Presseau, J. ( 2014 ). Discriminant content validity of a theor-
etical
domains framework questionnaire for use in implementation research. Implementation Science ,9(1), 11. https://
doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-9-11
Ivers, N. M., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2016 ). Reducing research waste with implementation laboratories. The Lancet ,388
(10044), 547 –548. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(16)31256-9
Ivers, N. M., Grimshaw, J. M., Jamtvedt, G., Flottorp, S., O ’Brien, M. A., French, S. D., Young, J., & Odgaard-Jensen, J.
(2014a ). Growing literature, stagnant science? Systematic review, meta-regression and cumulative analysis ofHEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 45
audit and feedback interventions in health care. Journal of General Internal Medicine ,29(11), 1534 –1541. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11606-014-2913-y
Ivers, N. M., Jamtvedt, G., Flottorp, S., Young, J. M., Odgaard-Jensen, J., French, S. D., O ’Brien, M. A., Johansen, M.,
Grimshaw, J., & Oxman, A. D. ( 2012 ). Audit and feedback: E ﬀects on professional practice and healthcare outcomes.
In The Cochrane Collaboration (Ed.), Cochrane database of systematic reviews . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. http://doi.wiley.
com/10.1002/14651858.CD000259.pub3
Ivers, N. M., Tricco, A. C., Trikalinos, T. A., Dahabreh, I. J., Danko, K. J., Moher, D., Straus, S. E., Lavis, J. N., Yu, C. H., Shojania,
K., Manns, B., Tonelli, M., Ramsay, T., Edwards, A., Sargious, P., Paprica, A., Hillmer, M., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2014b ).
Seeing the forests and the trees –Innovative approaches to exploring heterogeneity in systematic reviews of
complex interventions to enhance health system decision-making: A protocol. Systematic Reviews ,3(1), 88.
https://doi.org/10.1186/2046-4053-3-88
Jaén, C. R., Stange, K. C., & Nutting, P. A. ( 1994 ). Competing demands of primary care: A model for the delivery of clinical
preventive services. The Journal of Family Practice ,38, 166 –171.
Kassavou, A., & Sutton, S. ( 2018 ). Automated telecommunication interventions to promote adherence to cardio-meta-
bolic medications: Meta-analysis of e ﬀectiveness and meta-regression of behaviour change techniques. Health
Psychology Review, 12(1), 25 –42.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2017.1365617
Kassianos, A. P., Ward, E., Rojas-Garcia, A., Kurti, A., Mitchell, F. C., Nostikasari, D., Payton, J., Pascal-Saadi, J., Spears, C. A., &
Notley, C. ( 2019 ). A systematic review and meta-analysis of interventions incorporating behaviour change techniques
to promote breastfeeding among postpartum women. Health Psychology Review, 13, 344 –372. https://doi.org/10.
1080/17437199.2019.1618724
Knittle, K., Nurmi, J., Crutzen, R., Hankonen, N., Beattie, M., & Dombrowski, S. U. ( 2018 ). How can interventions increase
motivation for physical activity? A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 12(3), 211 –230.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1435299
Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., Peters, G.-J. Y., Mullen, P. D., Parcel, G. S., Ruiter, R. A. C., Fernández, M. E., Markham, C., &
Bartholomew, L. K. ( 2016 ). A taxonomy of behaviour change methods: An intervention mapping approach. Health
Psychology Review, 10(3), 297 –312. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1077155
Kok, G., Gurabardhi, Z., Gottlieb, N. H., & Zijlstra, F. R. H. ( 2015 ). Inﬂuencing organizations to promote health: Applying
stakeholder theory. Health Education & Behavior ,42(1_suppl), 123S –132S. https://doi.org/10.1177/
1090198115571363
Kok, G., Peters, G.-J. Y., Kessels, L. T. E., ten Hoor, G. A., & Ruiter, R. A. C. ( 2018 ). Ignoring theory and misinterpreting evi-
dence: The false belief in fear appeals. Health Psychology Review, 12(2), 111 –125. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.
2017.1415767
Lawrenson, J. G., Graham-Rowe, E., Lorencatto, F., Rice, S., Bunce, C., Francis, J. J., Burr, J. M., Aluko, P., Vale, L., Peto, T.,
Presseau, J., Ivers, N. M., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2018 ). What works to increase attendance for diabetic retinopathy screen-
ing? An evidence synthesis and economic analysis. Health Technology Assessment, 22(29), 1 –160. https://doi.org/10.
3310/hta22290
Little, E. A., Presseau, J., & Eccles, M. P. ( 2015 ). Understanding e ﬀects in reviews of implementation interventions using
the theoretical domains framework. Implementation Science ,10(1), 90. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-015-0280-7
Lock, M., Post, D., Dollman, J., & Par ﬁtt, G. ( 2020 ). Eﬃcacy of theory-informed workplace physical activity interventions: A
systematic literature review with meta-analyses. Health Psychology Review,1 –25.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.
2020.1718528
Lorencatto, F., Gould, N. J., McIntyre, S. A., During, C., Bird, J., Walwyn, R., Cicero, R., Glidewell, L., Hartley, S., Stanworth, S.
J., Foy, R., Grimshaw, J. M., Michie, S., Francis, J. J., & For the AFFINITIE programme. ( 2016 ). A multidimensional
approach to assessing intervention ﬁdelity in a process evaluation of audit and feedback interventions to reduce
unnecessary blood transfusions: A study protocol. Implementation Science ,11(1), 163. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13012-016-0528-x
May, C. R., Mair, F., Finch, T., MacFarlane, A., Dowrick, C., Treweek, S., Rapley, T., Ballini, L., Ong, B. N., Rogers, A., Murray, E.,
Elwyn, G., Légaré, F., Gunn, J., & Montori, V. M. ( 2009 ). Development of a theory of implementation and integration:
Normalization process theory. Implementation Science ,4(1), 29. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-4-29
McEachan, R. R. C., Conner, M., Taylor, N. J., & Lawton, R. J. ( 2011 ). Prospective prediction of health-related behaviours
with the theory of planned behaviour: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 5(2), 97 –144. https://doi.org/10.
1080/17437199.2010.521684
McEwan, D., Beauchamp, M. R., Kouvousis, C., Ray, C. M., Wyrough, A., & Rhodes, R. E. ( 2019 ). Examining the active ingre-
dients of physical activity interventions underpinned by theory versus no stated theory: A meta-analysis. Health
Psychology Review, 13(1), 1 –17.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1547120
McEwan, D., Harden, S. M., Zumbo, B. D., Sylvester, B. D., Kaulius, M., Ruissen, G. R., Dowd, A. J., & Beauchamp, M. R.
(2016 ). The e ﬀectiveness of multi-component goal setting interventions for changing physical activity behaviour:
A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 10(1), 67 –88.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.
2015.110425846 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
McGlynn, E. A., Asch, S. M., Adams, J., Keesey, J., Hicks, J., DeCristofaro, A., & Kerr, E. A. ( 2003 ). The quality of health care
delivered to adults in the United States. New England Journal of Medicine ,348(26), 2635 –2645. https://doi.org/10.
1056/NEJMsa022615
McHugh, S., Sinnott, C., Racine, E., Timmons, S., Byrne, M., & Kearney, P. M. ( 2018 ).‘Around the edges ’: Using behaviour
change techniques to characterise a multilevel implementation strategy for a fall prevention programme.
Implementation Science ,13(1), 113. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-018-0798-6
McIntyre, S. A., Francis, J. J., Gould, N. J., & Lorencatto, F. ( 2020 ). The use of theory in process evaluations conducted
alongside randomized trials of implementation interventions: A systematic review. Translational Behavioral
Medicine ,10, 168 –178. https://doi.org/10.1093/tbm/iby110
Mc Sharry, J., Fredrix, M., Hynes, L., & Byrne, M. ( 2016a ). Prioritising target behaviours for research in diabetes: Using the
nominal group technique to achieve consensus from key stakeholders. Research Involvement and Engagement ,2(1),
14.https://doi.org/10.1186/s40900-016-0028-9
Mc Sharry, J., Murphy, P. J., & Byrne, M. ( 2016b ). Implementing international sexual counselling guidelines in hospital
cardiac rehabilitation: Development of the CHARMS intervention using the Behaviour Change Wheel.
Implementation Science ,11(1), 134. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-016-0493-4
Michie, S., Fixsen, D., Grimshaw, J. M., & Eccles, M. P. ( 2009 ). Specifying and reporting complex behaviour change inter-
ventions: The need for a scienti ﬁc method. Implementation Science ,4(1), 40. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-4-40
Michie, S., & Johnston, M. ( 2004 ). Changing clinical behaviour by making guidelines speci ﬁc.BMJ,328(7435), 343 –345.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.328.7435.343
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Lawton, R., Parker, D., Walker, A., & ‘Psychological Theory ’Group. ( 2005 ). Making
psychological theory useful for implementing evidence based practice: A consensus approach. Quality & Safety in
Health Care ,14(1), 26 –33.https://doi.org/10.1136/qshc.2004.011155
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Francis, J. J., Hardeman, W., & Eccles, M. ( 2008 ). From theory to intervention: Mapping theor-
etically derived behavioural determinants to behaviour change techniques. Applied Psychology ,57(4), 660 –680.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-0597.2008.00341.x
Michie, S., Richardson, M., Johnston, M., Abraham, C., Francis, J. J., Hardeman, W., Eccles, M. P., Cane, J., & Wood, C. E.
(2013 ). The behavior change technique taxonomy (v1) of 93 hierarchically clustered techniques: Building an inter-
national consensus for the reporting of behavior change interventions. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,46(1), 81 –
95.https://doi.org/10.1007/s12160-013-9486-6
Michie, S., van Stralen, M. M., & West, R. ( 2011 ). The behaviour change wheel: A new method for characterising and
designing behaviour change interventions. Implementation Science ,6(1), 42. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-6-42
Milat, A. J., Bauman, A., & Redman, S. ( 2012 ). Narrative review of models and success factors for scaling up public health
interventions. Implementation Science ,10, 113. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-015-0301-6
Moore, G. F., Audrey, S., Barker, M., Bond, L., Bonell, C., Hardeman, W., Moore, L., O ’Cathain, A., Tinati, T., Wight, D., &
Baird, J. ( 2015 ). Process evaluation of complex interventions: Medical research council guidance. BMJ,350(6 March
2019), h1258. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.h1258
Nilsen, P. ( 2015 ). Making sense of implementation theories, models and frameworks. Implementation Science ,10(1), 53.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-015-0242-0
Ntoumanis, N., Ng, J. Y. Y., Prestwich, A., Quested, E., Hancox, J. E., Thøgersen-Ntoumani, C., Deci, E. L., Ryan, R. M.,
Lonsdale, C., & Williams, G. C. ( 2020 ). A meta-analysis of self-determination theory-informed intervention studies
in the health domain: E ﬀects on motivation, health behavior, physical, and psychological health. Health
Psychology Review,1 –31.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1718529
Nudelman, G., Kalish, Y., & Shiloh, S. ( 2018 ). The centrality of health behaviours: A network analytic approach. British
Journal of Health Psychology ,24, 215 –236. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjhp.12350
O’Brien, N., McDonald, S., Araújo-Soares, V., Lara, J., Errington, L., Godfrey, A., Meyer, T. D., Rochester, L., Mathers, J. C.,
White, M., & Sniehotta, F. F. ( 2015 ). The features of interventions associated with long-term e ﬀectiveness of physical
activity interventions in adults aged 55 –70 years: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 9
(4), 417 –433. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1012177
Orr, J. A., & King, R. J. ( 2015 ). Mobile phone SMS messages can enhance healthy behaviour: A meta-analysis of random-
ised controlled trials. Health Psychology Review ,9(4), 397–416. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1022847
Patey, A. M., Hurt, C. S., Grimshaw, J. M., & Francis, J. J. ( 2018 ). Changing behaviour ‘more or less ’–Do theories of behav-
iour inform strategies for implementation and de-implementation? A critical interpretive synthesis. Implementation
Science ,13(1), 134. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-018-0826-6
Patey, A. M., Islam, R., Francis, J. J., Bryson, G. L., Grimshaw, J. M., & The Canada PRIME Plus Team. ( 2012 ).
Anesthesiologists ’and surgeons’ perceptions about routine pre-operative testing in low-risk patients: Application
of the Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF) to identify factors that in ﬂuence physicians ’decisions to order pre-
operative tests. Implementation Science ,7(1), 52. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-7-52
Pearson, E., Byrne-Davis, L., Bull, E., & Hart, J. ( 2020 ). Behavior change techniques in health professional training:
Developing a coding tool. Translational Behavioral Medicine ,10,9 6–102. https://doi.org/10.1093/tbm/iby125HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 47
Peters, G.-J. Y., de Bruin, M., & Crutzen, R. ( 2015 ). Everything should be as simple as possible, but no simpler: Towards a
protocol for accumulating evidence regarding the active content of health behaviour change interventions. Health
Psychology Review, 9(1), 1 –14.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2013.848409
Peters, G.-J. Y., Ruiter, R. A. C., & Kok, G. ( 2013 ). Threatening communication: A critical re-analysis and a revised meta-analytic
test of fear appeal theory. Health Psychology Review ,7(sup1), S8 –S31. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2012.703527
Pfadenhauer, L. M., Gerhardus, A., Mozygemba, K., Lysdahl, K. B., Booth, A., Hofmann, B., Wahlster, P., Polus, S., Burns, J.,
Brereton, L., & Rehfuess, E. ( 2017 ). Making sense of complexity in context and implementation: The Context and
Implementation of Complex Interventions (CICI) framework. Implementation Science ,12(1), 21. https://doi.org/10.
1186/s13012-017-0552-5
Pottho ﬀ, S., Rasul, O., Sniehotta, F. F., Marques, M., Beyer, F., Thomson, R., Avery, L., & Presseau, J. ( 2019 ). The relationship
between habit and healthcare professional behaviour in clinical practice: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Health Psychology Review, 13(1), 73 –90.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2018.1547119
Prasad, V., & Ioannidis, J. P. ( 2014 ). Evidence-based de-implementation for contradicted, unproven, and aspiring health-
care practices. Implementation Science ,9(1), 1. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-9-1
Presseau, J., Ivers, N. M., Newham, J. J., Knittle, K., Danko, K. J., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2015 ). Using a behaviour change tech-
niques taxonomy to identify active ingredients within trials of implementation interventions for diabetes care.Implementation Science ,10(1), 55. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-015-0248-7
Presseau, J., McCleary, N., Lorencatto, F., Patey, A. M., Grimshaw, J. M., & Francis, J. J. ( 2019 ). Actor, Action, Context,
Target, Time (AACTT): A framework for specifying behaviour. Implementation Science ,14(1), 102. https://doi.org/
10.1186/s13012-019-0951-x
Presseau, J., Sniehotta, F. F., Francis, J. J., & Campbell, N. C. ( 2009 ). Multiple goals and time constraints: Perceived impact
on physicians ’performance of evidence-based behaviours. Implementation Science ,4(1), 77. https://doi.org/10.1186/
1748-5908-4-77
Protogerou, C., McHugh, R. K., & Johnson, B. T. ( 2020 ). How best to reduce unhealthy risk-taking behaviours? A meta-
review of evidence syntheses of interventions using self-regulation principles. Health Psychology Review ,14(1), 86 –
115. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1707104
Rhodes, R. E., Boudreau, P., Josefsson, K. W., & Ivarsson, A. ( 2020 ). Mediators of physical activity behaviour change inter-
ventions among adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Health
 Psychology Review,1 –15.https://doi.org/10.
1080/17437199.2019.1706614
Rhodes, R. E., Gray, S. M., & Husband, C. ( 2019 ). Experimental manipulation of aﬀ ective judgments about physical
activity: A systematic review and meta-analysis of adults. Health Psychology Review, 13(1), 18 –34.https://doi.org/
10.1080/17437199.2018.1530067
Rijsdijk, L. E., Bos, A. E. R., Lie, R., Leerlooijer, J. N., Eiling, E., Atema, V., Gebhardt, W. A., & Ruiter, R. A. C. ( 2014 ).
Implementation of the world starts with me, a comprehensive rights-based sex education programme in Uganda.
Health Education Research ,29(2), 340 –353. https://doi.org/10.1093/her/cyt108
Rothman, A. J., Klein, W. M. P., & Sheeran, P. ( 2020 ). Moving from theoretical principles to intervention strategies:
Applying the experimental medicine approach. In M. S. Hagger, L. D. Cameron, K. Hamilton, N. Hankonen, & T.
Lintunen (Eds.), The Handbook of behavior change (pp. 285 –299). Cambridge University Press.
Schwarzer, R. ( 2008 ). Modeling health behavior change: How to predict and modify the adoption and maintenance of
health behaviors. Applied Psychology ,57,1–29.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1464-0597.2007.00325.x
Seppälä, T., Hankonen, N., Korkiakangas, E., Ruusuvuori, J., & Laitinen, J. ( 2018 ). National policies for the promotion of
physical activity and healthy nutrition in the workplace context: A behaviour change wheel guided content analysisof policy papers in Finland. BMC Public Health ,18(1), 87. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-017-4574-3
Sheeran, P., Klein, W. M. P., & Rothman, A. J. ( 2017 ). Health behavior change: Moving from observation to intervention.
Annual Review of Psychology ,68(1), 573 –600. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010416-044007
Shojania, K. G., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2005 ). Evidence-based quality improvement: The state of the science. Health A ﬀairs,24
(1), 138 –150. https://doi.org/10.1377/hltha ﬀ.24.1.138
Sniehotta, F. F., Araújo-Soares, V., Brown, J., Kelly, M. P., Michie, S., & West, R. ( 2017 ). Complex systems and individual-
level approaches to population health: A false dichotomy? The Lancet Public Health ,2(9), e396 –e397. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S2468-2667(17)30167-6
Sniehotta, F. F., Presseau, J., & Araújo-Soares, V. ( 2015 ). On the development, evaluation and evolution of health behav-
iour theory. Health
 Psychology Review, 9(2), 176 –189. https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1022902
Spring, B., Champion, K. E., Acabchuk, R., & Hennessy, E. A. ( 2020 ). Self-regulatory behaviour change techniques in inter-
ventions to promote healthy eating, physical activity, or weight loss: A meta-review. Health Psychology Review,1 –32.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2020.1721310
Squires, J. E., Graham, I. D., Hutchinson, A. M., Michie, S., Francis, J. J., Sales, A., Brehaut, J., Curran, J., Ivers, N., Lavis, J.,
Linklater, S., Fenton, S., Noseworthy, T., Vine, J., & Grimshaw, J. M. ( 2015 ). Identifying the domains of context impor-
tant to implementation science: A study protocol. Implementation Science ,10(1), 135. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13012-015-0325-y
Squires, J., Presseau, J., Francis, J. J., Bond, C. M., Fraser, C., Patey, A., Porteous, T., Vachon, B., Tonelli, M., Yu, C. H., &
Grimshaw, J. ( 2013 ). Self-formulated conditional plans for changing health behaviour among healthcare consumers48 J. PRESSEAU ET AL.
and health professionals. In The Cochrane Collaboration (Ed.), Cochrane database of systematic reviews . John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd. http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/14651858.CD010869
Steckler, A., & Linnan, L. ( 2014 ).Process evaluation for public health interventions and research. John Wiley & Sons.
Steinmo, S. H., Michie, S., Fuller, C., Stanley, S., Stapleton, C., & Stone, S. P. ( 2015 ). Bridging the gap between pragmatic
intervention design and theory: Using behavioural science tools to modify an existing quality improvement pro-
gramme to implement ‘sepsis six ’.Implementation Science ,11(1), 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-016-0376-8
Strack, F., & Deutsch, R. ( 2004 ). Reﬂective and impulsive determinants of social behavior. Personality and Social
Psychology Review, 8(3), 220 –247. https://doi.org/10.1207/s15327957pspr0803_1
Suls, J., Mogavero, J. N., Falzon, L., Pescatello, L. S., Hennessy, E. A., & Davidson, K. W. ( 2020 ). Health behaviour change in
cardiovascular disease prevention and management: Meta-review of behaviour change techniques to a ﬀect self-
regulation. Health Psychology Review, 14(1), 43 –65.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1691622
Taylor, N., Parveen, S., Robins, V., Slater, B., & Lawton, R. ( 2013 ). Development and initial validation of the in ﬂuences on
patient safety behaviours questionnaire. Implementation Science ,8(1), 81. https://doi.org/10.1186/1748-5908-8-81
Thoolen, B., de Ridder, D., & van Lensvelt-Mulders, G. ( 2012 ). Patient-oriented interventions to improve antibiotic pre-
scribing practices in respiratory tract infections: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review, 6(1), 92 –112. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17437199.2011.552061
Voorn, V. M. A., Marang-van de Mheen, P. J., van der Hout, A., Hofstede, S. N., So-Osman, C., van den Akker-van Marle, M.
E., Kaptein, A. A., Stijnen, T., Koopman-van Gemert, A. W. M. M., Dahan, A., Vliet Vlieland, T. P. M. M., Nelissen, R. G. H.H., & van Bodegom-Vos, L. ( 2017 ). The e ﬀectiveness of a de-implementation strategy to reduce low-value blood man-
agement techniques in primary hip and knee arthroplasty: A pragmatic cluster-randomized controlled trial.
Implementation Science ,12(1), 72. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13012-017-0601-0
Weiner, B. J. ( 2009 ). A theory of organizational readiness for change. Implementation Science ,4(1), 67. https://doi.org/10.
1186/1748-5908-4-67
Wilson, T. E., Hennessy, E. A., Falzon, L., Boyd, R., Kronish, I. M., & Birk, J. L. ( 2020 ). Eﬀectiveness of interventions targeting
self-regulation to improve adherence to chronic disease medications: A meta-review of meta-analyses. Health
Psychology 
Review, 14(1), 66 –85.https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1706615
Wolfenden, L., Yoong, S. L., Williams, C. M., Grimshaw, J., Durrheim, D. N., Gillham, K., & Wiggers, J. ( 2017 ). Embedding
researchers in health service organizations improves research translation and health service performance: The
Australian Hunter New England population health example. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology ,85,3–11.https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jclinepi.2017.03.007
Wolk, C. B., Jager-Hyman, S., Marcus, S. C., Ahmedani, B. K., Zeber, J. E., Fein, J. A., Brown, G. K., Lieberman, A., & Beidas, R.
S. (2017 ). Developing implementation strategies for ﬁrearm safety promotion in paediatric primary care for suicide
prevention in two large US health systems: A study protocol for a mixed-methods implementation study. BMJ Open ,
7, e014407. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmjopen-2016-014407
Woolf, S. H. ( 2006 , January 8). Unhealthy Medicine: All breakthrough, no follow-throw. Washington Post. https://www.
washingtonpost.com/archive/opinions/2006/01/08/unhealthy-medicine-span-classbankheadall-breakthrough-no-follow-throughspan/d3b838a9-db0b-4b23-a410-c5de185f51d0/
Zwerver, F., Schellart, A. J. M., Anema, J. R., & van der Beek, A. J. (2013 ). Changes in insurance physicians ’attitudes, self-
eﬃcacy, intention, and knowledge and skills regarding the guidelines for depression, following an implementation
strategy. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation ,23(1), 148 –156. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10926-012-9378-9HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 49
