METHODOLOGY Open Access
GRAIDs: a framework for closing the gap in the
availability of health promotion programs and
interventions for people with disabilities
James H Rimmer1*, Kerri A Vanderbom1, Linda G Bandini2,3, Charles E Drum4, Karen Luken5,
Yolanda Suarez-Balcazar6and Ian D Graham7
Abstract
Background: Evidence-based health promotion programs developed and tested in the general population typically
exclude people with disabilities. To address this gap, a set of m ethods and criteria were created to adapt evidence-based
health promotion programs for people with disabilities. I n this first study, we describe a framework for adapting
evidence-based obesity prevention strategies for people with disabilities. We illustrate how the framework has
been used to adapt the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ’s (CDC) obesity prevention strategies for
individuals with physical and developmental disabilities.
Methods: The development of inclusion guidelines, recommendations and adaptations for obesity prevention
(referred to as GRAIDs –Guidelines, Recommendations, Adaptations Including Disability) consists of five components:
(i) a scoping review of the published and grey literature; (ii) an expert workgroup composed of nationally recognized
leaders in disability and health promotion who review, discuss and modify the scoping review materials and develop
the content into draft GRAIDs; (iii) focus groups with individuals with disabilities and their family members (conducted
separately) who provide input on the potential applicability of the proposed GRAIDs in real world settings; (iv) a
national consensus meeting with 21 expert panel members who review and vote on a final set of GRAIDs; and (v) an
independent peer review of GRAIDs by national leaders from key disability organizations and professional groups
through an online web portal.
Results: This is an ongoing project, and to date, the process has been used to develop 11 GRAIDs to coincide with 11
of the 24 CDC obesity prevention strategies.
Conclusion: A set of methods and criteria have been developed to allow researchers, practitioners and government
agencies to promote inclusive health promotion guidelines, strategies and practices for people with disabilities.
Evidence-based programs developed for people without disabilities can now be adapted for people with disabilities
using the GRAIDs framework.
Keywords: Disability, Health promotion, Guideline adaptation, Obesity
Background
People with disabilities face challenges in acquiring health
behaviors critical to the optimization of their own self-
managed health and wellness. Children with disabilities
are much less likely to participate in school-based or
community-based health promotion activities with theirpeers, and are far more likely to be sedentary and have a
poorer diet quality [1-4]. Adults and youth with disabilities
have higher rates of secondary health conditions including
pain, fatigue, depression, and obesity [5-8], and report
lower rates of participation in health promoting activities
such as physical activity [9,10]. Despite physical activity
and good nutrition being the cornerstones of evidence-
based health promotion interventions for reducing the
risk of comorbidities (e.g., diabetes, heart disease, stroke)
[11], many people with disabilities or caregivers who have* Correspondence: jrimmer@uab.edu
1University of Alabama at Birmingham/Lakeshore Foundation Research
Collaborative, 4000 Ridgeway Dr., Birmingham, AL 35209, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2014 Rimmer et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.Rimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
a child with a disability experience substantial difficulty
accessing these programs [12,13]. Inaccessible facilities,
lack of transportation to and from indoor and outdoorrecreation venues, absence of knowledgeable staff who
understand how to include people with disabilities in
their programs, and a general perception/attitude amongproviders that people with disabilities need ‘specialized ’vs.
integrated services, feed into a culture of isolation and
separation [14-16] and exposes this population to dispro-portionately higher rates of health disparities [17].
Not surprisingly, the wealth of evidence-based health
promotion literature in policy, environmental, program-matic and infrastructure changes has been generated by
researchers who unintentionally or unknowingly ex-
cluded people with disabilities [18]. The vast majority ofhealth promotion research targets populations who do
not have a disability, and researchers often, if not always,
use a ‘preexisting condition ’or disability as one of its ex-
clusion criteria, thus limiting the generalizability of these
findings for people with disabilities [19]. While special-
ized health promotion programs for certain disabilitygroups can be quite valuable in the short-term, they are
often difficult to sustain after the project ends and the
resources are no longer available (e.g., staff, time, trans-portation, expertise, space).
The adoption of certain evidence-based research find-
ings often takes years, if not decades, to reach its endpointin clinical or community practice [20]. The Institute of
Medicine [21], the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
(CAN-IMPLEMENT) [22,23], and the Guidelines Inter-national Network [24,25] have suggested that unnecessary
and costly duplication of programs or services could be
minimized or avoided if evidence-based guidelines wereadapted rather than developed de novo . An alternative to
the development of health promotion interventions de-
signed for select groups of people with or without disabil-ities is to formalize a process for adapting guidelines
established from the best available evidence. The Guidelines
International Network defines adaptation as ‘the systematic
approach to the endorseme nt and/or modification of a
guideline(s) pr oduced in one cultural and organizational
setting for application in a different context ’[24]. Adapta-
tion can render a program more responsive to a particular
target group and increase the program ’s sensitivity and fit
for a new population that was not part of the original re-
search [26]. It also offers greater transferability to real
world settings (i.e., knowledge translation) because the ad-aptations can be selected by local service providers based
on the needs of the end user(s) and the local context [23].
Adapting evidenced-based strategies/programs estab-
lished on people without disabilities for people with
disabilities holds strong p otential for accelerating use
of existing and new evidence-based findings in thisunderrepresented population. This paper describes thedevelopment of a process that includes a set of methods
and criteria for adapting evidence-based health promotion
guidelines for people with disabilities. For the purpose ofthis paper, we illustrate the approach using a set of
evidence-based obesity prevention strategies developed by
the U. S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention(CDC) [27] that have been adapted for youth and young
adults with physical and developmental disabilities.
Methods
Procedures
The comprehensive set of methods and criteria used in
this study was modeled after the Guidelines International
Network ADAPTE framework [24]. This framework was
chosen because it formalizes a set of methods for adaptingevidence-based guidelines developed in one context for
use in a different context without diminishing the quality
of the original guideline(s). The end product was a set ofGRAIDs , which stands for Guidelines, Recommendations,
andAdaptations Including Disability.
Guideline adaptation conceptual framework
Producing high quality inclusive guidelines, recommen-
dations and adaptations to effect change in public healthpractice requires strong procedural fidelity. As such, the
conceptual framework shown in Figure 1 was developed
to formalize a process that would endure the scrutiny ofresearchers, practitioners, and federal and public health
officials. The framework was established with an internation-
ally recognized scholar in guideline adaptation (I. Graham).A series of in-person and online meetings were arranged
to complete and finalize the set of decision algorithms that
were subsequently used to develop the GRAIDs.
Phase I. Set-up
Phase I, Step 1. Identification of evidence-based obesityprevention strategies
The first step in the health promotion guideline/strategy
adaptation process was to identify existing guidelines/strategies that were appropriate to adapt for the target
population. For our example, the CDC ’s 24 evidence-based
obesity prevention strategies from the published report,‘Recommended Community Strategies and Measurements
to Prevent Obesity in the United States, Implementation
and Measurement Guide ’[27] were selected. The strategies
were based on extensive systematic reviews of the best
available evidence and are currently recommended by the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS)and CDC as the major evidence-based strategies for redu-
cing obesity in the U.S. population (children, adolescents
and adults). The 24 evidence-based strategies, shown inAdditional file 1: Table S1, are being used across the U.S.
to support health promotion/disease prevention programs
targeting policy, systems and environmental changes at theRimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 2 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
community level [28]. Because of the rigor of development
of the CDC evidence-based strategies, we did not feel the
need to formally assess their quality before proceeding
with their adaptation. When the quality of source guide-
lines is not known or suspect, they should be quality ap-
proved using a validated guideline appraisal instrument
such as the AGREE II instrument (see below) to ensure
that they are of sufficient quality to justify adapting them.
Phase I, Step 2. Formation of expert panel/workgroup
The next step in the guideline/strategy adaptation process
was the formation of an expert panel composed of highly
qualified professionals and researchers who were appro-
priate content experts in obesity prevention/management
and disability. They were recruited using the following cri-
teria: (i) doctoral-level degree and/or strong clinical/public
health background associated with disability and health;
(ii) previous experience in health promotion/weight man-
agement interventions and programs for people with
disabilities; (iii) involved in a clinical setting and/or con-
ducting research across interventions related to obesity in
people with disabilities; (iv) expertise in at least one of the
four content areas (nutrition, physical activity, cultural
competency, and policy); and (v) no conflict of interest
(COI) related to the development of adapted guidelines
by having a competing project or grant.
The process for identifying and selecting expert panel
members was completed after an extensive review of the
literature to identify content experts who had published in
the field, in addition to contacting hospitals, universities
and rehabilitation centers where work was being com-
pleted by recognized experts in health, nutrition and dis-
ability. A total of 21 experts were selected from across the
U.S. representing all geographic regions. The expert panel
was subdivided into four workgroups by content area spe-
cialty, and each workgroup was composed of one chair
and four to five members (described in Phase II, Step 4).
Phase I, Step 3. Criteria for creating quality GRAIDs
Developing a quality set of adapted guidelines required a
formal process for capturing key elements in its design
and implementation. Several researchers have noted that
there are numerous factors that could influence the devel-
opment of a quality guideline, including the criteria used
to establish the guideline [23,29,30]. At the initiation of
the project, the expert panel met to develop the criteria
that would be used for guideline development and
finalization of the GRAIDS. The expert panel reviewed
the 23 AGREE II criteria [31] (Additional file 2: Table S2)
and came up with 15 additional criteria (Additional file 3:
Table S3) that were associated with disability-specific rele-
vance to adapted guideline development methodology.
The six AGREE II constructs are: Scope and Purpose
(three items), Stakeholder Involvement (three items),
Figure 1 GRAID guideline adaptation framework.Rimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 3 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
Rigor of Development (eight items), Clarity and Presenta-
tion (three items), Applicability (four items), and Editorial
Independence (two items).
The combined set of criteria considers the quality of a
guideline based on the level of confidence that can be
placed in the process, including the minimization of biaseslinked to the rigor of development, presentation and ap-
plicability of a clinical practice guideline, clear reporting of
each step in the development process, and the guideline ’s
applicability to people with disabilities. The additional
set of 15 criteria relate to the appropriateness (e.g., age,
gender, culture), usability (e.g., product, service or pro-gram), and acceptability (e.g., can be implemented without
drawing negative attention to the end user) of each GRAID
with respect to people with disabilities. The GRAID criteriawere voted on and approved by the 21-member panel,
providing a level of expert validity. The expert panel
used these 38 criteria when they voted on final acceptanceof each GRAID.
Phase II. Development of draft GRAIDs
Phase II, Step 1. Structural elements of content
development
Each GRAID consists of three structural elements: (i) an
overarching inclusion guideline that matches the CDC
strategy; (ii) a set of inclusion recommendations and adap-
tations separated into one of four content domains (BuiltEnvironment, Services, Instruction, and Equipment); and
(iii) a set of policy recommendations. ‘Adaptations ’pro-
vided the finest level of detail for supporting the inclusionof an individual into an existing health promotion program
and contained a variety of options so that implementation
strategies could be customized for the end user at the locallevel. This information was categorized under an overarch-
ing ‘Inclusion Recommendation ’for each content domain.
The four sets of ‘Inclusion Recommendations ’provided
guidance at the administrative/programmatic level on how
a specific set of adaptations could be incorporated into an
existing health promotion program or service. A separateset of ‘Policy Recommendations ’were also included with
each GRAID that referenced any existing federal law re-
quiring access to certain services or programs, or any rec-ommendations that had the potential to change practice or
modify existing policy at the local or state level. After the
adaptations and inclusion a nd policy recommendations
were drafted, the ‘inclusion guideline ’was written and
linked to the specific CDC strategy. The GRAIDs were then
reviewed for cultural competency and modifications madewhere necessary. A sample GRAID is shown in Additional
file 4: Table S4.
Phase II, Step 2. Data sources for creating the GRAID
Several different data sources were used to create each
GRAID. Since there were fe w empirical studies thataddressed adaptations associated with physical activity
and nutrition for individuals with disabilities, we relied
not only on scholarly articles but on textbooks, disser-tations, theses, reports, online media, and the expertise
of staff to review the literature related to obesity pre-
vention. Three trained reviewers searched for informa-tion using keywords related to each of the CDC obesity
strategies. Key words varied depending on the focus of
the strategy. For example, in GRAID 8, Increasing Accessto Outdoor Recreation, keywords included ‘communities
AND recreation AND disabilities, ’‘communities AND out-
door OR recreation AND disabilities, ’‘obesity AND parks, ’
‘outdoor recreation AND accessibility. ’Various databases
were also searched (e.g., PubMed, SportDiscus, CINAHL,
Scopus, dissertation abstracts). Reviewer materials wereregularly assessed by the coordinator of the project for
quality, content, currency and appropriateness.
Prior to conducting the first review, the reviewers were
required to practice the process and reach at least 80%
inter-rater reliability choosing information from the article
and categorizing it into one of the four content domains:Built Environment, Services, Instruction and Equipment.
Legislative materials relevant to the draft GRAID were
placed in a separate file and labeled, Policy. A total of 20%of articles in a domain were randomly chosen. Each re-
viewer had to read through each article and identify the
relevant information that could be used as an adaptationor recommendation and categorize it into the correct do-
main. Once 80% inter-rater reliability was reached, the
three reviewers were able to complete their review of theliterature. Content was placed in an Excel file referred to
as the GRAID ‘Shadow Document ’that included the
name of the author(s), source of materials (e.g., peer-reviewed article, book, website), and date of publication.
The material was then organized by content domain and
used by the expert workgroup to create the draft GRAIDs.
Phase II, Step 3. Focus groups with stakeholders
A major emphasis in the disability community is providingopportunities for people with disabilities and family mem-
bers to have a voice in the development of programs and
materials related to their health and wellbeing [32,33]. It isimportant to have a clear understanding of the problem
from the perspective of the target population. One
method for engaging end users in the GRAID develop-ment process was through a series of focus groups con-
ducted on a specific topic area at different stages of the
research process. For example, five focus groups wereconducted with youth/adults with disabilities and their
family members in three diff erent U.S. states. Institu-
tional review board approval and consent/assent byeach participant were obtained prior to conducting the
focus groups. The focus groups for youth/adults with
disabilities were held separately from the focus groupsRimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 4 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
for family members/caregivers. Focus group participants
had to have the ability to respond to a series of questions
and were paid a nominal fee for their time ($25). Eachfocus group had between 4 and 10 participants and was
conducted in either English or Spanish to ensure cultural
representation. The focus groups lasted approximatelyone hour and involved the researcher asking a series of
semi-structured, open-ended questions about behaviors,
experiences, barriers and facilitators related to physical ac-tivity and nutrition. The focus groups were audio re-
corded, transcribed and analyzed by a team of researchers
and stakeholders. Findings from the focus groups resultedin the development of several new adaptations, but also
validated that the adaptations identified and developed
from the review of literature and expert workgroup mem-bers were consistent with their comments.
Phase II, Step 4. Expert workgroup online meetings
As described in the CAN-IMPLEMENT guide and
Knowledge-To-Action framewo rk, forming working panels
is necessary to help oversee the adaptation process [22].In the current study, the expert panel was subdivided
into four expert workgroups to oversee the guideline
adaptation process. The four expert workgroups (PhysicalActivity, Nutrition, Cultural Competency, Policy) were
convened through an internet-based online meeting every
month for two hours to review the content that the scop-ing reviewers identified as applicable to one of the CDC
evidence-based strategies (one strategy is reviewed per on-
line meeting). The workgroup assignments were staggeredto allow the primary content experts in Physical Activity
and Nutrition to conduct their review first, followed by
the Cultural Competency workgroup. If the CDC strategyrelated to physical activity, the Physical Activity Expert
Workgroup met first followed by the Nutrition Expert
Workgroup. If the strategy related to nutrition, then theexpert workgroups met in reverse order. The second
workgroup addressed any gaps in the draft GRAID devel-
oped by the primary workgroup.
After the Physical Activity and Nutrition Workgroups
completed their review, the Cultural Competency Work-
group met online to review the draft GRAID for culturalrelevance. Cultural competency in this study referred to
the applicability of the strategy to the norms, values and
beliefs of ethnically and racially diverse (e.g., AfricanAmerican and Latino) youth a nd adults with disabilities
[34]. A culturally competent intervention met the following
criteria: the intervention was based on the cultural valuesof the target group; the strategies that made up the inter-
vention reflected the subjective cultural characteristics, in-
cluding interests, expectations, and norms of members ofdiverse race and ethnic groups; and the components that
made up the strategies reflected the behavioral preferences
and expectations of the members of the target group[34,35]. The five Cultural Competency workgroup mem-
bers had backgrounds in race/ethnic diversity and were
selected because of their combined expertise in culturalcompetency, and disability and health promotion.
Finally, after the three workgroups completed their work
o nt h ed r a f tG R A I D ,t h eP o l i c yW o r k g r o u pc o n v e n e d ,reviewed the draft GRAID, and formulated a set of pol-
icy recommendations. Whenever possible, a policy rec-
ommendation used federal or state law to support therecommendation.
Preparation for online workgroup meetings
Prior to the online meeting, the coordinator reviewed
the materials identified by the scoping review team to
ensure that they were appropriate for guideline adaptation.The Expert Workgroup received the materials several days
in advance of the meeting, and all members were expected
to review them prior to convening. The expert workgroupalso received a glossary of terms (Additional file 5: Table S5)
so that each member stated a new guideline, recommen-
dation or adaptation with consistent terminology. Thegroup discussion involved a review of the materials in a
structured, orderly process by content domain (built en-
vironment, services, instruction, equipment). The materialwas posted on an online meeting platform so that each
member was able to view the same content. The coordin-
ator moderated the meeting and responded to questionsfrom workgroup members. One scoping reviewer was al-
ways present in case there were questions or if clarifica-
tion was needed related to the primary source of thecontent. During the discussion, each workgroup member
could agree or disagree about the quality, clarity or appro-
priateness of any of the content. If the workgroup agreedthat the statement was appropriate, it was converted into
a draft adaptation under the appropriate content domain.
The GRAID was then reviewed by the next Expert Work-group. The process for the online workgroup meetings be-
came much more efficient after the first few draft GRAIDs
were developed.
Phase III. Finalization
Phase III, Step 1. Annual expert panel consensus meeting
The four expert workgroups were convened into a 21-
member expert panel that met at a remote location for
2 days to review all of the GRAIDs that were developedin the previous 12 months. Expert panel members were
divided into two groups. Each group consisted of 10 to
11 members and was assigned two domains (e.g., builtenvironment and equipment). An effective and neutral
facilitator explained the procedures and rules and then
oversaw the process to ensure that there was a balancedcontribution from all members. As recommended by
G-I-N [36], the facilitator was not a content expert and
remained objective and unbiased in the finalization ofRimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 5 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
the draft GRAIDs. This was done to reduce the poten-
tial introduction of personal bias that might arise with a
facilitator who has expertise in the content area beingdiscussed.
Panel members provided feedback on each GRAID
(e.g., content, wording, structure). If at least one memberdisagreed with the wording or quality of any element of
the GRAID, the group discussed the item until it was re-
solved. If the issue could not be resolved by the expertpanel, the facilitator entered the discussion to help clarify
the issue and settle any disagreement.
After the consensus meeting, all recommended changes
were added to each GRAID and then voted on anonym-
ously by the entire expert panel using a web-based appli-
cation. The expert panel used the AGREE II and GRAIDcriteria for evaluating each GRAID prior to voting. There
had to be 75% agreement among the expert panel mem-
bers for a GRAID to be finalized during this phase.
Phase III, Step 2. Stakeholder review of draft GRAID
Stakeholders also reviewed each GRAID prior to finalization.A web application was created for stakeholder comment
on the draft GRAID. This provided an opportunity for the
greatest number of invited stakeholders to contributecomments about the posted GRAID. The web applica-
tion captured feedback and commentary regarding each
GRAID including:
1. Applicability –across target population or
limitations by age, gender, and/or cultural groups;
2. Content Analysis –Physical Activity (adaptations
categorized under the Built Environment, Services,
Instruction, and Equipment); Nutrition (same asPhysical Activity); Cultural (cultural adaptations to
physical activity and nutrition appropriate for
minority groups); and Policy (policy-relatedrecommendations using federal, state or city
ordinances to support, whenever possible, an
adaptation/recommendation);
3. Potential Barriers and Facilitators to implementation;
4. Reference information for adding or modifying
content. If no reference was available, the itemhad to provide basic information on name,
location and contact for the program in which it
is or was used;
5. Contact information including at least a valid email
address so project staff can follow up if there are
additional questions.
Phase III, Step 3. External peer review of draft GRAID
The draft GRAIDs were posted to a secure website andan independent external peer review group that had no
involvement in developing the GRAID was solicited to
review each one. The external peer review group wascomposed of four to six professionals with expertise in
disability and health. Each member reviewed the GRAID
for content, clarity and consistency using the AGREE II[31] and GRAID criteria. The peer reviewers also had the
opportunity to provide written feedback.
All comments from the stakeholder and peer review
were disseminated to the expert panel. Major issues or
concerns were discussed through an online meeting forum,
and any recommended changes to a GRAID required a 2/3majority vote by the expert panel.
Phase III, Step 4. Feedback from original guideline
developers
The final set of GRAIDs was sent back to the original
guideline development group, which in the current project
was the Division of Nutrition, Physical Activity and Obesity
at the CDC. To facilitate this process, we included aCDC program officer as a consultant on the project who
attended the annual consensus meeting to gain a better
understanding of the process and to offer guidance, whennecessary, on the appropriate terminology to use when
discussing each GRAID and to ensure that the adaptations
were consistent with the original CDC strategy.
Phase III, Step 5. Incorporate peer and stakeholder feedback
Prior to releasing the GRAID, one final step involves thereview of external stakeholder feedback. Any critical infor-
mation that may have been missed by the expert panel is
incorporated into the final GRAID prior to release.
Phase III, Step 6. Release of the guideline
The plan is to release the GRAIDs through an extensivedissemination network that includes several organizational
partners associated with disability, health, and the health
promotion area (i.e., obesity). Many of these organizationswrote a letter of support when the project was funded in-
dicating their commitment to disseminating the GRAIDs
through their membership and affiliates.
Discussion
The major aim of this project was to develop a set of
methods and criteria that would facilitate the inclusion
of people with disabilities in mainstreamed health pro-motion research and programs. The GRAID framework
provides researchers, practitioners, and funding agencies
with a structured, systematic pr ocess for adapting evidenced-
based health promotion guidelines developed in the
general (non-disabled) population for people with dis-
abilities. Adapting existing evidence-based guidelines/programs vs. de novo guideline/program development
p r o v i d e sau n i q u eo p p o r t u n i t yf o rr e s e a r c h e r sa n dp r o -
grammers in health promotion and disability to workRimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 6 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
closely with health promotion researchers and program-
m e r sw h oh a v en oe x p e r t i s ei nd i s a b i l i t yt oe s t a b l i s ha
unifying inclusion science framework that represents
the needs of all research participants/community members.
The uniqueness of the GRAID framework is that it in-
corporates both traditional (i.e., scoping reviews, consen-sus panel) and non-traditional (i.e., focus groups with
individuals with disabilities and/or family members, stake-
holder feedback through an ope n source web-based portal)
data in its development. Each GRAID consists of multiple
adaptations to allow implementers or researchers to select
the appropriate set of inclusion elements that coincidewith their organizational, structural, economic and cul-
tural context.
Feedback from the expert panel about the GRAID de-
velopment process has been favorable. Many panel mem-
bers expressed enthusiasm about using the GRAIDs in
their own research and/or practice. The regular participa-tion in the monthly phone calls and high attendance rates
at the annual consensus meeting were reflective of their
support for the process. Several panel members commen-ted that while the GRAID framework required substantive
support and facilitation to reach finalization, it was an ex-
tremely worthwhile process and holds promise for pro-moting integration of people with disabilities in existing
and future health promotion research and programs.
The current state-of-the-science in health promotion
research generally runs on two parallel tracks: one
designed for the general population where most of the
resources are directed, and the other track for disability-specific research with significantly less resources. The
failure of these two systems to capture the best elements
from both sets of prevention programs and infuse theminto existing networks, systems and environments to ef-
fectively promote the health of all community members
results in gaps and disparities in health promotion ac-cess, inefficient use of time and money, and health in-
equities (a lower impact on health outcomes for people
with disabilities).
The complexity of changing the behaviors of organiza-
tions and service providers warrants a paradigm shift
away from isolated interventions with specific disability
groups toward the inclusion of individuals with disabilities
in existing evidence-based interventions and programsavailable today and in the future. Given limitations in
government resources and the difficulty in establishing
randomized controlled trials with small subsets of thepopulation (e.g., a certain type of disability) [37], funding
agencies should collaborate on developing an implementa-
tion science framework that encourages researchers toexamine the usefulness/value of the GRAIDs, how they
are implemented in the community and their potential
impact on health outcomes in the appropriate target group.The GRAID methodology attempts to systematically bridgescience and practice and presents a framework for pro-
moting the inclusion of people with disabilities in existing
and future health promotion research and programs. It isour hope that this new framework will lay the foundation
for an effective and sustainable approach to guideline
adaptation of existing evidence-based health promotionprograms and future research directives developed for the
general population for people with disabilities.
Limitations
Given the limited research and information related to
adapting evidence-based health promotion strategies forpeople with disabilities, much of the content used to for-
mulate the GRAIDs was derived from the non-peer
reviewed literature in the form of books, articles, papers,reports and websites. Only English literature was reviewed.
It is plausible that we may have missed a certain adaptation
for a specific disability group. Thus far, the GRAIDs havenot been empirically tested. Future research is needed to
test the effectiveness of the GRAIDs in real world, inclu-
sive health promotion settings.
Plans for GRAID Validation
The GRAIDs developed in this study provide an oppor-tunity for researchers and practitioners to test their valid-
ity with certain target groups of people with disabilities
who were not part of the original evidence-based research.Using integrated knowledge translation, the GRAIDs can
be tested at many different levels including national, state
or community initiatives, existing or new community-based ‘best practice ’or evidence-based programs, or at
the policy level to support inclusive health promotion
practices and services for people with disabilities. Scaleup evaluation of GRAIDs in existing and future evidence-
based health promotion programs will help clarify their
potential as a means for promoting ‘real world ’inclusive
health promotion practices. Funding agencies may con-
sider using the GRAID methodology and/or currently
existing GRAIDs to support research and evaluation ef-forts that examine their utility for children, adults and se-
niors with disabilities at the local, state or national level.
Conclusion
The GRAID framework promotes the inclusion of people
with disabilities in current and future health promotionresearch and programs and is an important first step in es-
tablishing an inclusion science that recognizes the needs
of people with disabilities within the same context as therest of the community [38]. The high rates of health dis-
parities reported among children [5,39] and adults with
disabilities [17,40] warrant s this new approach for promot-
ing uptake of successful evidence-based practices developed
on non-disabled populations for people with disabilities.
For long-term sustainable health improvements to occur,Rimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 7 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
community planners, service providers, and health profes-
sionals need a common set of GRAIDs that facilitate the
inclusion of people with disabilities in health promotioninitiatives in schools, healthcare facilities, employment set-
tings, and the community-at-large [32,41].
Additional files
Additional file 1: Table S1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
24 Evidence-Based Obesity Prevention Strategies.
Additional file 2: Table S2. AGREE II Criteria.
Additional file 3: Table S3. GRAID Criteria for Assessment of
Disability-Specific Methodological Quality.
Additional file 4: Table S4. Sample GRAID.
Additional file 5: Table S5. GRAID Glossary.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
JHR conceptualized the methodology and was the primary contributor tothis manuscript. KAV assisted with the writing and coordinated the
completion of the methodology. IDG was the primary consultant, advising
on the steps and modification of the methodology to ensure fidelity and rigor ofthe evidence-base being adapted. IDG was also a key contributor to the contentand editing of the manuscript. LGB, CED, KL, YSB also contributed to the editing
of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
A special thanks to our expert panel members who worked diligently on the
development of the GRAIDs: Yolanda Suarez-Balcazar, University of Illinois atChicago; Linda Bandini, Eunice Kennedy Shriver Center/UMass MedicalSchool & Boston University; Lynne Cory, Clemson University; Charles Drum,
University of New Hampshire; Georgia Frey, Indiana University; Brigida Hernandez,
YAI Network; Kristie Hubbard, Tufts University; Kathleen Humphries, OregonHealth and Science University; Willi Horner-Johnson, Oregon Health and ScienceUniversity; June Isaacson Kailes, Harris Family Center for Disability & Health
Policy; Joanne Kouba, Loyola University Chicago; Karen Luken, Disability
and Health consultant; Sandra Magana, University of Illinois at Chicago;Mary Matteliano, University at Buffalo; Pamela Patt, Shriners Hospitals forChildren, Chicago; Amy Rauworth, NCHPAD, Lakeshore Foundation; Mary
Segal, Temple University; Debbie Thorpe, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill; Lee Wallace, University of Tennessee Health Science Center;Glen White, University of Kansas; Angela Odoms-Young, University of Illinois atChicago. We would also like to acknowledge and thank our CDC consultant
David Brown for his time and input.
Funding
The contents of this publication were developed under a grant from the
Department of Education, NIDRR grant number H133A120102. However,those contents do not necessarily represent the policy of the Department ofEducation, and you should not assume endorsement by the Federal Government.
Author details
1University of Alabama at Birmingham/Lakeshore Foundation Research
Collaborative, 4000 Ridgeway Dr., Birmingham, AL 35209, USA.2Eunice
Kennedy Shriver Center/UMass Medical School, 465 Medford St.,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.3Department of Health Sciences, Boston
University, 635 Commonwealth Ave., Boston, MA 02215, USA.4University of
New Hampshire, 10 West Edge Drive, Suite 101, Durham, NH 03824, USA.
5Disability and Health consultant, 800 Highland Trail, Chapel Hill, NC 27516,
USA.6College of Applied Health Sciences, Department of Occupational
Therapy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 1919 West Taylor, MC 8-11, Chicago,IL 60612, USA.
7Department of Epidemiology and Community Medicine,
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa; Senior Scientist, Centre for
Practice-Changing Research, The Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, 501Smyth Road, Box 711, Ottawa, ON K1H 8 L6, Canada.Received: 10 March 2014 Accepted: 22 July 2014
Published: 14 August 2014
References
1 . S t e e l eC A ,K a l n i n sI V ,R o s s e nB E ,B i g g a rD W ,B o r t o l u s s iJ A ,J u t a iJ W : Age-related
health risk behaviors of adolescents with physical disabilities. Soz-Praventivmed
2004, 49:132 –141.
2. Darrah J, Wessel J, Nearingburg P, O ’Connor M: Evaluation of a community
fitness program for adolescents with cerebral palsy. Pediatr Phys Ther
1999, 11:18–23.
3. Rimmer JA, Wang E, Yamaki K, Davis B: Documenting Disparities in Obesity
and Disability .I nFOCUS Technical Brief (24). Austin, TX: SEDL; 2009.
4. Evans E, Must A, Anderson SE, Curtin C, Scampini R, Maslin M, Bandini L:
Dietary patterns and body mass index in children with autism and
typically developing children. Res Autism Dis 2012, 6:399 –405.
5. Rimmer J, Yamaki K, Davis B, Wang E, Vogel LC: Obesity and obesity-related
secondary conditions in adolescents with Intellectual/Developmentaldisabilities. J Intell Dis Res 2010, 54:787 –294.
6. Kinne S, Patrick DL, Doyle DL: Prevalence of secondary conditions among
people with disabilities. Am J Public Health 2004, 94:443 –445.
7. Rimmer JH, Chen M-D, Hsieh K: A conceptual model for identifying,
preventing and treating secondary conditions in people with disabilities.Phy Ther 2011, 91:1728 –1738.
8. Yamaki K, Rimmer JH, Lowry BD, Vogel LC: Prevalence of obesity-related
chronic health conditions in overweight adolescents with disabilities. Res
Dev Disab 2011, 32:280 –288.
9. Carroll D, Courtney-Long EA, Stevens AC, Sloan ML, Lullo C, Visser SN,
Fox MH, Armour BS, Campbell VA, Brown DR, Dorn JM: Vital signs: disability
and physical activity –United States, 2009 –2012. MMWR 2014,
63(early release):p. 1 –p. 7.
10. Sit CH, McManus A, McKenzie TL, Lian J: Physical activity levels of children
in special schools. Prev Med 2007, 45:424 –432.
11. Institute of Medicine: Accelerating Progress in Obesity Prevention: Solving the
Weight of the Nation. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2012.
12. Malone LA, Barfield JP, Brasher JD: Perceived benefits and barriers to
exercise among persons with physical disabilities or chronic health
conditions within action or maintenance stages of exercise. Dis Health J
2012, 5:254 –260.
13. Kirchner CE, Gerber EG, Smith BC: Designed to deter: community barriers
to physical activity for people with visual or motor impairments. Am J
Prev Med 2008, 34:349 –352.
14. Murphy N, Carbone P, Council on Children With Disabilities: Promoting the
participation of children with disabilities in sports, recreation, andphysical activities. Pediatrics 2008, 121:1057 –1061.
15. Dunn J, Leitschuh C: Special Physical Education. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt
Publishing; 2006.
16. Rimmer JH: The conspicuous absence of people with disabilities in public
fitness and recreation facilities: lack of interest or lack of access? Am J
Health Promot 2005, 19(5):327 –329. ii.
17. Iezzoni L: Eliminating health and health care disparities among the
growing population of people with disabilities. Health Aff 2011,
30:1947 –1954.
18. Williams AS, Moore SM: Universal design of research: Inclusion of persons
with disabilities in mainstream biomedical studies. Sci Trans Med 2011,
3:1–5.
19. Tomlinson M, Swartz L, Officer A, Chan KY, Rudan I, Saxena S: Research
priorities for health of people with disabilities:an expert opinionexercise. Lancet 2009, 374:18571862.
20. Barrable B, Thorogood N, Noonan V, Tomkinson J, Joshi P, Stephenson K,
Barclay J, Kovac Burns K: Model for bridging the translational “valleys of
death ”in spinal cord injury research. J Healthcare Leadership 2014, 6:15–27.
21. Institute of Medicine: Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington,
DC: The National Academies Press; 2011.
22. Harrison M, van den Hoek J, Canadian Guideline Adaptation Study Group:
CAN-IMPLEMENT: A Guideline Adaptation and Implementation PlanningResource. Kingston, Ontario, Canada: Queen ’s University School of Nursing
and Canadian Partnership Against Cancer; 2012.
23. Harrison M, Grahan ID, van den Hoek J, Dogherty EJ, Carley ME, Angus V:
Guideline adaptation and implementation planning: a prospectiveobservational study. Implement Sci 2013, 8:49–62.Rimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 8 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
24. Guidelines International Network: Working Groups/Adaptation. 2013.
Available from: http://www.g-i-n.net/activities/adaptation.
25. Fervers B, Burgers JS, Haugh MC, Latreille J, Mlika-Cabbane N, Paquet L,
Coulombe M, Poirier M, Burnand B: Adaptation of clinical guidelines: literature
review and proposition for a framework and procedure. In J Qual Health Care
2006, 18:167 –176.
26. Graham I, Harrison MB, Lorimer K, Piercianowski T, Friedberg E, Buchanan M,
Harris C: Adapting national and international leg ulcer practice
guidelines for local use: The Ontario Leg Ulcer Community Care
Protocol. Adv Skin Wound Care 2005, 18:307 –318.
27. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: Recommended community
strategies and measurements to prevent obesity in the United States.
MMWR 2009, 58(RR-7):p. 1 –p. 30.
28. Blanck H, Collins J: CDC ’s winnable battles: Improved nutrition, physical
activity, and decreased obesity. Child Obes 2013, 9:469 –471.
29. Gagliardi A, Brouwers MC: Integrating guideline development and
implementation: analysis of guideline development manual instructions
for generating implementation advice. Implement Sci 2012, 7:67.
30. Hilbink M, Ouwens M, Burgers JS, Kool RB: A new impetus for guideline
development and implementation: construction and evaluation of a
toolbox. Implement Sci 2014, 9:1–7.
31. Brouwers M, Kho ME, Browman GP, Burgers JS, Cluzeau F, Feder G, Fervers B,
Graham ID, Grimshaw J, Hanna SE, Littlejohns P, Makarski J, Zitzelsberger L:
AGREE II: advancing guideline development, reporting and evaluation in
health care. CMAJ 2010, 182:E834 –E842.
32. Drum C, Peterson JJ, Culley C, Krahn G, Heller T, Kimpton T, McCubbin J,
Rimmer JH, Seekins T, Suzuki R, White G: Guidelines and Criteria for the
implementation of community-based health promotion programs for
individuals with disabilities. Am J Health Promot 2009, 24(2):93 –101.
33. Abdullah N, Horner-Johnson W, Drum CE, Krahn GL, Staples E, Weisser J,
Hammond L: Healthy lifestyles for people with disabilities. Calif J of Health
Promot 2004, 2:42–54.
34. Marin G: Defining culturally appropriate community interventions:
Hispanics as a case study. J Community Psychol 1993, 21(2):149 –161.
35. Suarez-Balcazar Y, Frieseman J, Lukyanova V: Culturally competent
interventions to address obesity among African American and Latino
children and youth. Occup Ther Health Care 2013, 27:113 –128.
36. Qaseem A, Forland F, Macbeth F, Ollenschlager G, Phillips S, van der Wees P:
Guidelines International Network: toward international standards for
clinical practice guidelines. Ann Intern Med 2012, 156:525 –531.
37. Rimmer JH, Chen M-D, McCubbin JA, Drum C, Peterson J: Exercise intervention
research on persons with disabilities. What we know and where we need to
go.Am J Phys Med Rehabil 2010, 89:249 –263.
38. Rimmer JH: Promoting inclusive community-based obesity prevention
programs for children and adolescents with disabilities: The why and
how. Child Obes 2011, 7:177 –184.
39. Steele CA, Kalnins IV, Jutai JW, Stevens SE, Bortolussi JA, Biggar DW: Lifestyle
health behaviors of 11- to 16-year old youth with physical disabilities.
Health Educ Res 1996, 11:173 –186.
40. Drum C, Krahn G, Culley C, Hammond L: Recognizing and responding to
the health disparities of people with disabilities. Californian J Health
Promot 2005, 3:29–42.
41. Boslaugh S, Andresen EM: Correlates of physical activity for adults with
disability. Prev Chron Dis 2006, 3(3):1 –14.
doi:10.1186/s13012-014-0100-5
Cite this article as: Rimmer et al. :GRAIDs: a framework for closing the
gap in the availability of health promotion programs and interventions
for people with disabilities. Implementation Science 2014 9:100.Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitRimmer et al. Implementation Science 2014, 9:100 Page 9 of 9
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/9/1/100
