Health Psychology
2000, Vol. 19, No. l(Suppl-), 64-69Copyright 2000 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
0278-6133/00/S5.00 DOI: 10.1037//0278-6133.19.1(Suppl.).64
Toward a Theory-Based Analysis of Behavioral Maintenance
Alexander J. Rothman
University of Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus
Intervention strategies that can produce successful rates of long-term behavior change have
proven elusive and indicate the need for new approaches to this vexing problem. However, the
development of new intervention strategies is constrained by our current conceptualization of
behavioral maintenance. This article reviews how the dominant models of health behavior
change have operationalized the psychological processes that guide the initiation and
maintenance of a new pattern of behavior. In light of this review, an alternative framework is
proposed based on the premise that the decision criteria that lead people to initiate a change in
their behavior are different from those that lead them to maintain that behavior. Decisions
regarding behavioral initiation are predicted to depend on favorable expectations regarding
future outcomes, whereas decisions regarding behavioral maintenance are predicted to depend
on perceived satisfaction with received outcomes. The implications of this framework for
behavioral interventions are addressed.
Key words: maintenance, decision making, behavior change
Given that sustained changes in people's lifestyles can
lead to substantial reductions in disease morbidity and
mortality, effective behavioral interventions offer the possi-
bility of enhanced quality of life and reduced health care
costs (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
1991). As has been documented in the preceding series of
articles in this issue, intervention approaches have been
identified that reliably elicit healthy changes in behavioral
practices such as smoking, weight control, and exercise. Yet,
impressive rates of initial changes in behavior have not
consistently translated into similar rates of behavioral
maintenance.
Why have intervention strategies that produce favorable
rates of initial behavior change failed to facilitate long-term
maintenance? In this article, I consider this question in light
of how the dominant models of health behavior change have
conceptualized behavioral maintenance. Specifically, inves-
tigators have assumed, either implicitly or explicitly, that the
psychological processes that underlie the decision to initiate
a change in behavior generalize to decisions regarding
behavioral maintenance, and, therefore, interventions that
facilitate an initial change hi behavior will assist—or at least
not undermine—subsequent efforts to maintain that change.
I believe it is time to reconsider this assumption and to
recognize that the psychological factors that enable people
This research was supported in part by a grant-in-aid from the
University of Minnesota, National Institute of Neurological Disor-
ders and Stroke Grant NS38441, and Minnesota Obesity Center
Grant DK50456.1 thank Robert Jeffery and Kristi Kelly for their
comments on an earlier version of this article.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to
Alexander J. Rothman, Department of Psychology, University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities Campus, Elliott Hall, 75 East River Road,
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455. Electronic mail may be sent to
rothmOOl @ tc.umn.edu.to adopt a new pattern of behavior are not necessarily those
that help them to sustain that behavior over time.
Current Conceptualizations of Behavioral
Maintenance
Current models of health behavior—for example, health
belief model (Rosenstock, Strecher, & Becker, 1988); protec-
tion motivation theory (Maddux & Rogers, 1983); social
cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986); theory of planned behav-
ior (Ajzen, 1991); theory of reasoned action (Ajzen &
Fishbein, 1980); transtheoretical model of behavior change
(Prochaska, DiClemente, & Norcross, 1992)—have focused
on elucidating how people determine whether to adopt a
given behavioral alternative. The conceptual framework
underlying these theories has been shown to be quite similar,
although some distinctions can be made between stage-
based and continuum-based models (Weinstein, Rothman, &
Sutton, 1998). The decision to adopt a new behavior is based
on an analysis of the relative costs and benefits associated
with different courses of action; the primary difference
between theories is captured in the particular set of beliefs
that is predicted to be most closely associated with a
decision to take action (Salovey, Rothman, & Rodin, 1998;
Schwarzer, 1992; Weinstein, 1993). Investigators have used
these theoretical models to explain why people adopt
unhealthy and healthy behavioral practices and have success-
fully relied on their specifications to design interventions
that promote the adoption of healthier behavior (Salovey et
al., 1998).
How have these models dealt with the process of behav-
ioral maintenance? Some models such as the health belief
model (Rosenstock et al., 1988) and protection motivation
theory (Maddux & Rogers, 1983) make no direct reference
to issues regarding behavioral maintenance, and empirical
tests of these models have focused primarily on predicting a
64
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
SUPPLEMENTAL ISSUE: MAINTENANCE THEORIES 65
single behavioral outcome. To the extent that maintenance
has been addressed, it has been defined as a course of action
sustained over a specified period of time, and, thus, the
processes that govern the decision to maintain a pattern of
behavior are thought to be the same as those that govern its
initiation.
Theoretical approaches such as the theory of reasoned
action (Ajzen & Fishbein, 1980) and the theory of planned
behavior (Ajzen, 1991) also make no formal distinction
between decisions regarding the initiation of a behavior and
those regarding the maintenance of that behavior over time.
In each case, people's volitional behavior is considered to be
a function of their intentions, which, in turn, reflect their
attitudes toward the behavior and the perceived social norm.
Although the specific attitudinal and normative beliefs that
guide people's behavior are allowed to change over time, the
specific factors that determine how or whether these beliefs
change are not delineated. Some investigators have inte-
grated a measure of prior behavior into these models to help
address the persistence of behavior. In behavioral domains
that involve a repeated series of actions over time, a person's
prior behavior may become a better predictor of continued
action than his or her attitudes or intentions regarding the
behavior (Rom's, Yates, & Kirscht, 1989; Sutton, 1994;
Triandis, 1977). Although including a measure of prior
behavior can improve the model's ability to describe the
stability in people's behavior, it provides little additional
guidance as to the conditions that determine whether a
change in behavior is successfully maintained. Moreover,
the thesis that prior behavior predicts future action is
difficult to reconcile with the repeated observation that
people, in fact, fail to maintain successfully enacted changes
in their behavior.
According to social-cognitive theory (Bandura, 1986),
self-efficacy beliefs are a crucial determinant of both the
initiation and the maintenance of a change in behavior.
Confidence in one's ability to take action serves to sustain
effort and perseverance in the face of obstacles. The
successful implementation of changes in behavior bolsters
people's confidence, which, in turn, facilitates further action,
whereas failure experiences serve to undermine personal
feelings of efficacy. Although the reciprocal relation be-
tween perceived self-efficacy and behavior is well docu-
mented, this relation in and of itself cannot explain why
successfully enacted changes in behavior are not maintained
(e.g., McCaul, Glasgow, & O'Neill, 1992).
Schwarzer (1992) has proposed a conceptual model that
delineates how self-efficacy beliefs affect behavioral mainte-
nance. Specifically, these beliefs motivate the formulation
and execution of a plan of action that guides behavior over
time. Successful maintenance is predicted to depend on the
implementation of an action plan that includes a set of
cognitive and behavioral skills that help people cope with
behavioral lapses and, thus, prevent relapse (Brownell,
Marlatt, Lichtenstein, & Wilson, 1986; Marlatt & Gordon,
1985). Although Schwarzer's proposed framework has intui-
tive appeal, empirical support for interventions that provide
people with relapse prevention skills has been modest at best
(Curry & McBride, 1994).Even when maintenance is characterized as a distinct
stage within a theoretical framework, its conceptualization
has been limited. The transtheoretical model of behavior
change (Prochaska et al., 1992) explicitly distinguishes
between people in the action and maintenance stages of the
behavior change process. Yet, the basis for this classification
rests primarily on a somewhat arbitrary distinction in the
length of time that a behavior has been adopted (Bandura,
1997; Weinstein et al., 1998). According to the model, the
array of cognitive and behavioral strategies that people rely
on to enact a change in their behavior are similarly predicted
to help them sustain that action over time. Once again, the
factors that determine whether someone will successfully
maintain a pattern of behavior are not specified sufficiently
for an investigator to predict a priori the psychological
conditions that lead to relapse.
Taken together, the dominant theoretical approaches to
the study of health behavior offer little guidance as to how
the processes that govern the initiation and the maintenance
of behavior change might differ. Because maintenance has
been operationalized as action sustained over time, it is
predicted to rely on the same set of behavioral skills and
motivational concerns that facilitate the initial change in
behavior. Yet, this perspective is at odds with the repeated
finding that those who successfully initiate a change in their
behavioral practices frequently fail to maintain that pattern
of behavior. Moreover, interventions that have increased the
intensity or the duration of a successful behavioral treatment
program can delay the onset of relapse but they do not
substantially improve rates of long-term maintenance (e.g.,
Curry & McBride, 1994; Jeffery et al., 1993; McCaul et al.,
1992; Perri, Nezu, Patti, & McCann, 1989). Given that the
repeated application of intervention strategies that facilitate
short-term success does little to improve rates of long-term
success, the premise that there are important differences in
the psychological processes that govern behavioral initiation
and maintenance appears worthy of consideration.
A New Approach to Behavioral Maintenance
There are likely to be numerous factors that are differen-
tially associated with the successful initiation and the
successful maintenance of a new pattern of behavior. Some
investigators have described aspects of people's social
environments that are differentially related to behavioral
initiation and maintenance (e.g., Mermelstein, Cohen, Licht-
enstein, Baer, & Kamarck, 1986), whereas others have
pointed toward personality characteristics (e.g., Stein, New-
comb, & Bentler, 1996). Models of relapse prevention
(Marlatt & Gordon, 1985) focus on the specific tasks that are
required to effectively cope with a behavioral lapse, but
these strategies, by definition, are relevant only after some-
one has adopted a new pattern of behavior. However, none
of these investigative approaches can account for the
observed dissociation between rates of successful initiation
and maintenance.
Behavioral decisions, by definition, involve a choice
between different behavioral alternatives. What differenti-
ates decisions concerning initiation from those concerning
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
66 ROTHMAN
maintenance are the criteria on which the decision is based.
People's decisions regarding behavioral initiation involve a
consideration of whether the potential benefits afforded by a
new pattern of behavior compare favorably to their current
situation, and thus, the decision to initiate a new behavior
depends on people holdingfavorable expectations regarding
future outcomes. In comparison, decisions regarding behav-
ioral maintenance involve a consideration of whether the
outcomes associated with the new pattern of behavior are
sufficiently desirable to warrant continued action. Thus, the
decision to maintain a behavior depends on people's per-
ceived satisfaction with received outcomes.
The premise that the decision to maintain a behavior
reflects people's on-going experience with a pattern of
behavior is consistent with the general framework of Leven-
thal's self-regulatory model of illness behavior (Leventhal &
Cameron, 1987; Leventhal, Nerenz, & Steele, 1984). Leven-
thal and his colleagues have argued that models of health
behavior change must capture the dynamic nature of the
behavior change process and be responsive to changes in
people's behavioral, psychological, and physiological expe-
riences. However, Leventhal's self-regulatory model makes
no formal distinction between the criteria that underlie
decisions regarding behavioral initiation and those that
underlie decisions regarding behavioral maintenance.
Behavioral Initiation
Because the proposed conceptualization of behavioral
initiation is not controversial and, in fact, is consistent with
current models of health behavior change, it will considered
only briefly. People attempt to change their behavior when
their expectations regarding the outcomes afforded by a new
pattern of behavior are perceived to be significantly more
favorable than those provided by their current behavior
(Weinstein, 1993). The more optimistic people are about the
value of potential outcomes and their ability to obtain those
outcomes, the more willing they will be to take action.
Because the process of behavioral initiation is oriented
toward obtaining future outcomes, it can be conceptualized
as an approach-based self-regulatory system in which peo-
ple's progress toward their goals is indicated by a reduction
in the discrepancy between their current state and a desired
reference state (Carver & Scheier, 1990).
There is considerable empirical evidence to support the
proposed conceptualization of behavioral initiation. Numer-
ous studies have demonstrated that rates of behavioral
initiation are positively related to people's beliefs about both
the likelihood and the value of future outcomes (for reviews,
see Bandura, 1997; Salovey et al., 1998; Schwarzer, 1992).
Moreover, behavioral interventions that emphasize the desk-
able consequences afforded by a new pattern of behavior
have had considerable success generating changes in behav-
ior (Lichtenstein & Glasgow, 1992; Wing, 1997).
Behavioral Maintenance
Whereas behavioral initiation is thought to be based on
expectations about future outcomes, the decision to maintainan adopted pattern of behavior is thought to be based on
people's satisfaction with the outcomes they have obtained.
The guiding premise is that people will maintain a change in
behavior only if they are satisfied with what they have
accomplished. The feeling of satisfaction indicates that the
initial decision to change the behavior was correct, and
furthermore, it sustains the effort people must put forth to
monitor their behavior and minimize vulnerability to re-
lapse. People choose to maintain a behavior in order to
preserve a favorable situation and strive to avoid an alterna-
tive, less favorable state. Thus, the decision processes that
guide behavioral maintenance can be conceptualized as an
avoidance-based self-regulatory system in which progress is
indicated by a sustained discrepancy between a current state
and an undesired reference state (Carver & Scheier, 1990).
How do people determine whether they are satisfied with
the outcomes afforded by a new pattern of behavior? People
can monitor how a change in their behavior has influenced
how they feel, what they can or cannot do, and the quality of
their interactions with friends and families. But, how do they
ascertain the value of these outcomes? For example, people
may find it reinforcing to be complimented about a change in
their weight but still find it difficult to determine whether
they have received enough compliments to justify their
efforts. In informationally ambiguous situations people
compare their obtained outcomes to an available standard
(Festinger, 1954). Moreover, people's expectations fre-
quently serve as a standard against which people evaluate
the outcomes they have obtained (e.g., Gollwitzer, 1996;
Rusbult & Van Lange, 1996; Schwarz & Strack, 1991).
Given the focal role that expectations serve in the process of
behavioral initiation, people are likely to hold clear expecta-
tions about what a new pattern of behavior will provide. To
the extent that people's experiences meet or exceed their
expectations, they will be satisfied with the behavior and
motivated to maintain it. However, when people's experi-
ences fail to meet their expectations, they will be dissatisfied
with the change in their behavior and less motivated to
sustain it. An important implication of this framework is that
interventions that heighten people's expectations about a
new pattern of behavior may encourage them to initiate a
change, but over time may lead people to be less satisfied
with the outcomes they actually obtain, thus undermining
maintenance.
Because research has focused on the processes underlying
the initiation of behavior change, little empirical evidence is
available to evaluate the thesis that behavioral maintenance
is guided by perceived satisfaction. However, several inves-
tigators have found behavioral maintenance to be associated
with perceived satisfaction with the outcomes afforded by
the new pattern of behavior. Surveys of individuals who
have maintained a change in their behavior over an extended
period of time have found that people who are successful
report a high degree of satisfaction with how the change has
affected their lives (e.g., Klem, Wing, McGuire, Seagle, &
Hill, 1997). In a similar manner, Jeffery and I have found
that women who maintained weight losses a year after the
end of a behavioral treatment program attributed greater
benefits to having lost weight than did women who had
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
SUPPLEMENTAL ISSUE: MAINTENANCE THEORIES 67
failed to maintain their weight loss (Rothman & Jeffery,
1998). Moreover, successful and unsuccessful maintainers
did not differ in their initial weight nor in the amount of
weight they had lost during the treatment program. Urban,
White, Anderson, Curry, and Kristal (1992) examined
whether women's personal experiences during the interven-
tion component of the Women's Health Trial predicted
long-term maintenance of a low-fat diet. Women who
reported greater costs associated with following the diet and
stronger feelings of dissatisfaction with low-fat foods had
poorer rates of long-term compliance with the low-fat diet.
A second set of studies offers some tentative support for
the thesis that long-term maintenance may be undermined
by expectations that are overly optimistic. For example,
Oettingen and Wadden (1991) reported that women who
initially held exceedingly optimistic fantasies about what
their life would be like if they lost weight subsequently had
less success in a 12-month weight treatment program. More
recently, Sbrocco, Nedegaard, Stone, and Lewis (1999)
found mat women enrolled in a weight control program that
emphasized modest treatment goals lost less weight during
treatment compared to those in a traditional behavior
therapy, but that at 12 months post-treatment these women
had, in fact, lost more weight than those who had partici-
pated in the traditional program. Although taken together
these findings are consistent with the proposed framework,
any conclusions that can be drawn are constrained by the
absence of studies that have comprehensively tested the
predicted relation between expectations, perceived satisfac-
tion, and long-term behavioral maintenance.
Implications for Different Behavioral Domains
One implication of the proposed framework is that people
should find it easier to initiate a behavior when it is
motivated by a desire to reach a favorable goal-state (i.e., an
approach-oriented process) than when it is motivated by a
desire to avoid an unfavorable goal-state (i.e., an avoidance-
oriented process). Specifically, people who strive toward a
desirable goal should have little difficulty constructing the
optimistic expectations about future outcomes that serve to
motivate behavioral initiation. However, these optimistic
expectations may be difficult to satisfy, and thus, people may
find it harder to maintain a change in an approach-oriented
behavior than an avoidance-oriented behavior. Thus, the
model suggests that the manner in which people are
motivated to change their behavior will affect the extent to
which they it find more difficult to initiate or to maintain a
specific pattern of behavior.
This proposition may help to explain differences in the
relative rates of initiation and maintenance that have been
observed across different behavioral practices. For example,
weight control behavior is typically motivated by a desire to
reach a positive goal, characterized by improvements in
one's appearance and physical comfort (Foster, Wadden,
Vogt, & Brewer, 1997), whereas smoking cessation is
typically motivated by a desire to avoid the health threats
associated with smoking (Gibbons & Eggleston, 1996;
Gibbons, Eggleston, & Benthin, 1997). Consistent with thisanalysis, overweight persons have been shown to be more
likely to enroll in weight loss programs than are smokers to
enroll in cessation programs (e.g., Jeffery et al., 1993;
Schmid, Jeffery, & Hellerstedt, 1989). Even those smokers
who enroll in a cessation program typically complete a
series of treatment sessions that systematically promote the
benefits of cessation before they are sufficiently motivated to
initiate a quit attempt. By way of comparison, individuals in
a weight control program are prepared to enact changes in
their weight control practices at the first treatment session.
Although rates of behavioral initiation are more impressive
in the area of weight control than that of smoking cessation,
rates of long-term maintenance reveal a different pattern of
results. Smokers who remain abstinent for at least six
months appear to be more likely to sustain their new pattern
of behavior than are overweight persons who have success-
fully lost weight for a similar period of time (e.g., Hunt,
Barrett, & Branch, 1971; Kramer, Jeffery, Forster, & Snell,
1989). The greater likelihood of long-term success among
smokers may reflect, in part, their more modest expectations
about what it would be like to be nonsmokers. These modest
expectations may dampen smokers' interest in initiating a
change in behavior, but they should increase the chance that
smokers will be satisfied with how cessation has affected
their lives. On the other hand, participants in weight control
programs may find it difficult to satisfy their expectations as
to how a change in weight will affect their lives, even in the
face of significant changes in body weight.
Of course, any conclusion based on a comparison across
behavioral domains such as smoking and weight control is
constrained by the numerous differences between these two
domains. However, converging evidence for the proposed
framework could potentially be obtained within each behav-
ioral domain. For example, although overweight people may
typically be motivated to lose weight in order to be thin,
some are motivated by the desire to avoid being overweight.
In light of the proposed framework, people who are moti-
vated to avoid being overweight should have greater diffi-
culty initiating a change in their behavior than those who are
motivated by the desire to be thin. However, they should
have greater success at maintaining the change in behavior
over time. A similar distinction could be made between
smokers who are motivated to quit in order to avoid being a
smoker and those who are motivated by the desire to become
a nonsmoker. In fact, Gibbons and Eggleston (1996) have
shown that a smoker's negative image of the typical
smoker—but not then' image of the typical nonsmoker—
predicted 12-month cessation status.
Future Directions for Research
The need for new, innovative models of behavioral
maintenance is clear. However, any advance in our under-
standing of how people maintain changes in their behavior is
currently constrained by the limited scope of the empirical
literature. Too few studies have systematically examined the
decision processes that underlie both the initiation and
maintenance of behavior change. The absence of empirical
data undermines our ability to rigorously evaluate and test
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
68 ROTHMAN
models of behavioral maintenance. Investigators need to
extend their focus beyond the relation between the beliefs
participants report prior to or immediately following treat-
ment and their maintenance practices. Although some inves-
tigators have collected retrospective reports of these experi-
ences (e.g., Urban et al., 1992), we/know surprisingly little
about people's psychological experience during their partici-
pation in a behavioral change program. The repeated assess-
ment of participants' thoughts and feelings both during and
after a behavioral treatment program would provide investi-
gators with the opportunity to delineate the complex relation
between people's beliefs and their behavior. This would
enable us to develop a more sophisticated understanding of
how the adoption of a new pattern of behavior affects
people's beliefs about the behavior and, moreover, what
effect these new beliefs have on subsequent behavioral
decisions (e.g., Gerrard, Gibbons, Benthin, & Hessling,
1997; Gibbons et al., 1997). The development of measure-
ment tools that capture people's experiences in their natural
environments offers investigators new opportunities to sys-
tematically test theoretical predictions regarding the deci-
sion processes that guide maintenance (Shiftman & Stone,
1998). Moreover, due to recent advances in statistical
modeling, investigators are no longer constrained by the
requirement that they obtain the same set of measurements
over time from each participant (Bryk & Raudenbush, 1992;
Hedeker & Mermelstein, 1996). However, these tools will
prove to be only as valuable as the theoretical frameworks
that guide their application and use.
Although the distinction between the initiation and the
maintenance phases of the behavior change process is a
useful heuristic, the process by which people transition from
one phase to the next is not well defined or understood.
Further information about the natural history of the behavior
change process across a range of behavioral domains would
be invaluable and would help to delineate how the process of
maintenance unfolds. This information would improve our
understanding of how and when people move from initiating
to maintaining a change in their behavior, and it would
enable investigators to determine whether there is a point in
time when people can be said to have successfully termi-
nated the process of behavior change.
Finally, research must also be directed toward identifying
factors that moderate how people regulate their behavior.
The previously drawn comparisons between smoking cessa-
tion and weight control illustrate how features of the
behavioral domain can generate predictions as to whether
people will have greater difficulty initiating or maintaining a
change in their behavior. People's dispositional tendencies
may also influence how they regulate their behavior. For
example, Gibbons and his colleagues (Gibbons et al., 1997)
have observed that self-esteem moderates how people
respond to a failed attempt to quit smoking. Specifically,
people with high self-esteem lowered their estimate of the
dangers posed by smoking and their commitment to quit in
order to justify their behavioral lapse, whereas people with
low self-esteem who had relapsed reported limited changes
in their beliefs. The implications of these cognitive adjust-
ments for future behavioral practices is currently unclear. Onthe one hand, the ability to justify one's failure may render
people less motivated to make a subsequent quit attempt.
However, it is quite possible that these cognitive adjust-
ments act to preserve people's self-confidence and thus
ensure that they have the psychological resources to initiate
another quit attempt. Other dispositional factors that may
affect how people make decisions regarding behavioral
initiation and maintenance include the extent to which
people are dispositionally optimistic about the future (Scheier
& Carver, 1985) as well as their chronic tendency to engage
in either approach-based or avoidance-based self-regulation
(Carver & Scheier, 1990; Higgins, 1998).
Taken together, a research program that is dedicated to
specifying the psychological processes that guide the main-
tenance of behavior change will provide the empirical
foundation on which a comprehensive model of behavioral
maintenance can be based, which, in turn, can guide the
development of interventions that can address the challenges
posed by long-term behavior change.
References
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behavior. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 50, 179-211.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and
predicting social behavior. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and action: A
social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bandura, A. (1997). Self efficacy: The exercise of control. New
York: Freeman.
Brownell, K. D., Marlatt, G. A., Lichtenstein, E., & Wilson, G. T.
(1986). Understanding and preventing relapse. American Psy-
chologist, 41, 765-782.
Bryk, A. S., & Raudenbush, S. W. (1992). Hierarchical linear
models: Applications and data analysis methods. Newbury Park,
CA: Sage.
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. (1990). Principles of self-regulation:
Action and emotion. In E. T. Higgins & R. Sorrentino (Eds.),
Handbook of motivation and cognition: Foundations of social
behavior (Vol. 2, pp. 645-672). New York: Guilford Press.
Curry, S. J., & McBride, C. M. (1994). Relapse prevention for
smoking cessation: Review and evaluation of concepts and
interventions. Annual Review of Public Health, 15, 345-366.
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes.
Human Relations, 7, 117-140.
Foster, G. D., Wadden, T. A., Vogt, R. A., & Brewer, G. (1997).
What is a reasonable weight loss? Patients' expectations and
evaluations of obesity treatment outcomes. Journal of Consult-
ing and Clinical Psychology, 65, 79-85.
Gerrard, M., Gibbons, F. X., Benthin, A. C., & Hessling, R. M.
(1997). A longitudinal study of the reciprocal nature of risk
behaviors and risk cognitions in adolescents: What you do
shapes what you think and vice versa. Health Psychology, 15,
344-354.
Gibbons, F. X., & Eggleston, T. J. (1996). Smoker networks and the
"typical smoker": A prospective analysis of smoking cessation.
Health Psychology, 15, 469-476.
Gibbons, F. X., Eggleston, T. J., & Benthin, A. C. (1997). Cognitive
reactions to smoking relapse: The reciprocal relation between
dissonance and self-esteem. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 72, 184-195.
Gollwitzer, P. M. (1996). The volitional benefits of planning. In
P. M. Gollwitzer & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The psychology of action:
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
SUPPLEMENTAL ISSUE: MAINTENANCE THEORIES 69
Linking cognition and motivation to behavior (pp. 287-312).
New York: Guilford Press.
Hedeker, D., & Mermelstein, R. M. (1996). Application of
random-effects regression models in relapse research. Addiction,
91, S211-S229.
Higgins, E. T. (1998). Promotion and prevention: Regulatory focus
as a motivational principle. In M. Zanna (Ed.), Advances in
experimental social psychology (Vol. 30, pp. 1-46). New York:
Academic Press.
Hunt, W. A., Barrett, L. W., & Branch, L. G. (1971). Relapse rates
in addiction programs. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 27,
455-456.
Klem, M. L., Wing, R. R., McGuire, M. T., Seagle, H. M., & Hill,
J. O. (1997). A descriptive study of individuals successful at
long-term maintenance of substantial weight loss. American
Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 66, 239-246.
Kramer, F. M., Jeffery, R. W., Forster, J. L., & Snell, M. K. (1989).
Long-term follow-up of behavioral treatment for obesity: Pat-
terns of weight regain among men and women. International
Journal of Obesity, 13, 123-136.
Jeffery, R. W., Forster, J. L., French, S. A., Kelder, S. H., Lando,
H. A., McGovern, P. G., Jacobs, D. R., & Baxter, J. E. (1993).
The Healthy Worker Project: A work-site intervention for weight
control and smoking cessation. American Journal of Public
Health, 83, 395-401.
Leventhal, H., & Cameron, L. (1987). Behavioral theories and the
problem of compliance. Patient Education and Counseling, 10,
117-138.
Leventhal, H., Nerenz, D. R., & Steele, D. J. (1984). Illness
representations and coping with health threats. In A. Baum & J.
Singer (Eds.), A handbook of psychology and health (pp.
219-252). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Lichtenstein, E., & Glasgow, R. E. (1992). Smoking cessation:
What have we learned over the past decade? Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 60, 518-527.
Maddux, J. E., & Rogers, R. W. (1983). Protection motivation and
self-efficacy: A revised theory of fear appeals and attitude
change. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 469-
479.
Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985). Relapse prevention:
Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive behaviors.
New York: Guilford Press.
McCaul, K. D., Glasgow, R. E., & O'Neill, H. K. (1992). The
problem of creating habits: Establishing health protective dental
behaviors. Health Psychology, 11, 101-110.
Mermelstein, R., Cohen, S., Lichtenstein, E., Baer, J. S., &
Kamarck, T. (1986). Social support and smoking cessation and
maintenance. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
54, 447^53.
Oettingen, G., & Wadden, T. A. (1991). Expectation, fantasy, and
weight loss: Is the impact of positive thinking always positive?
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 15, 167-175.
Perri, M. G., Nezu, A. M., Patti, E. T., & McCann, K. L. (1989).
Effect of length of treatment on weight loss. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 57, 450-452.
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In
search of how people change: Applications to addictive behav-
iors. American Psychologist, 47, 1102-1114.
Ronis, D. L., Yates, J. P., & Kirscht, J. P. (1989). Attitudes,
decisions, and habits as determinants of behavior. In A. R.
Pratkanis, S. J. Breckler, & A. G. Greenwald (Eds.), Attitude
structure and function (pp. 213-239). New York: Erlbaum.Rosenstock, I. M., Strecher, V. J., & Becker, M. H. (1988). Social
learning theory and the health belief model. Health Education
Quarterly, 15, 175-183.
Rothman, A. J., & Jeffery, R. W. (1998). [Expectations and
maintenance]. Unpublished raw data.
Rusbult, C. E., & Van Lange, P. A. M. (1996). Interdependence
processes. In E. T. Higgins & A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.), Social
psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 564—596). New
York: Guilford Press.
Salovey, P., Rothman, A. J., & Rodin, J. (1998). Health behavior. In
D. T. Gilbert, S. T. Fiske, & G. Lindzey (Eds.), The handbook of
social psychology (4th ed., Vol. 2, pp. 633-683). Boston:
McGraw-Hill.
Sbrocco, T, Nedegaard, R. C., Stone, J. M., & Lewis, E. L. (1999).
Behavioral choice treatment promotes continuing weight loss:
Preliminary results of a cognitive-behavioral decision-based
treatment for obesity. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 67, 260-266.
Scheier, M. F., & Carver, C. S. (1985). Optimism, coping, and
health: Assessment and implications of generalized outcome
expectancies. Health Psychology, 4, 219-247.
Schmid, T. L., Jeffery, R. W, & Hellerstedt, W. L. (1989). Direct
mail recruitment to home-based smoking and weight control
programs: A comparison of strategies. Preventive Medicine, 18,
503-517.
Schwarz, N., & Strack, F. (1991). Evaluating one's life: A
judgmental model of subjective well-being. In F. Strack, M.
Argyle, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Subjective well-being: An interdis-
ciplinary perspective (pp. 27-47). Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Schwarzer, R. (1992). Self-efficacy in the adoption and mainte-
nance of health behaviors: Theoretical approaches and a new
model. In R. Schwarzer (Ed.), Self-efficacy: Thought control of
action (pp. 217-243). Washington, DC: Hemisphere.
Shiffman, S., & Stone, A. A. (1998). Introduction to special section:
Ecological momentary assessment in health psychology. Health
Psychology, 17, 3-5.
Stein, J. A., Newcomb, M. D., & Bentler, P. M. (1996). Initiation
and maintenance of tobacco smoking: Changing personality
correlates in adolescence and young adulthood. Journal of
Applied Social Psychology, 26, 160-187.
Sutton, S. R. (1994). The past predicts the future: Interpreting
behaviour-behaviour relationships in social psychological mod-
els of behaviour. In D. R. Rutter & L. Quine (Eds.), Social
psychology and health: European perspectives (pp. 71-88).
Aldershot, England: Avebury.
Triandis, H. C. (1977). Interpersonal behavior. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/Cole.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. (1991). Healthy
people 2000: National health promotion and disease prevention
objectives. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Urban, N., White, E., Anderson, G. L., Curry, S., & Kristal, A. R.
(1992). Correlates of maintenance of a low-fat diet among
women in the Women's Health Trial. Preventive Medicine, 21,
279-291.
Weinstein, N. D. (1993). Testing four competing theories of
health-protective behavior. Health Psychology, 12, 324-333.
Weinstein, N. D., Rothman, A. J., & Sutton, S. R. (1998). Stage
theories of health behavior: Conceptual and methodological
issues. Health Psychology, 17, 290-299.
Wing, R. R. (1997). Behavioral approaches to the treatment of
obesity. In G. Bray & C. J. Bouchard (Eds.), Handbook of
obesity (pp. 855-874). New York: Marcel Dekker.
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
