A Systematic Review of Psychological Interventions for Adolescents and
Young Adults Living With Chronic Illness
Ursula M. Sansom-Daly
University of New South Wales and Sydney Children’s HospitalMichelle Peate
University of New South Wales
Claire E. Wakefield
Sydney Children’s Hospital and University of New South WalesRichard A. Bryant
University of New South Wales
Richard J. Cohn
Sydney Children’s Hospital and University of New South Wales
Objective: There is increasing recognition that adolescents and young adults (AYAs) with chronic illnesses
experience common psychological challenges. This article reviewed published psychological interventions forAYAs with cancer, diabetes, juvenile idiopathic arthritis, sickle cell disease, and asthma. Common, efficaciousintervention components were examined to generate clearer recommendations for future age-appropriate,evidence-based intervention development. Methods: Five databases including MEDLINE, MEDLINE In
Process & Non-Indexed Citations, PsycINFO, EMBASE, and CINAHL, were searched for studies involvingAYAs aged 10–30 years, using quantitative two-group methods, published from 1979–2010. Of 1,233abstracts, 87 were extracted for further analysis and a final 25 studies were eligible for inclusion. Thirteen ofthese studies included AYAs with diabetes, 7 studies involved AYAs with cancer, and 5 included AYAs withother illnesses. Results: Educational interventions showed some significant positive results, particularly when
targeted knowledge outcomes were measured. Several skills-based programs, some including parents, showedpositive results, with moderate effect sizes. Interventions which taught communication skills, incorporatedpractical components (e.g., role-plays, homework), involved /H113506 sessions, and spanned at least 3 months in
length, appeared more likely to achieve positive outcomes. Conclusions: Skills-based interventions delivered
over multiple sessions may yield the most positive results in AYAs with chronic illness. Given the fewpeer-support groups eligible for review, their efficacy remains unclear. This review points to the need for
intervention development that teaches adaptive coping skills, is grounded in theoretical frameworks, and adheres tostrict randomization and independent assessments to evaluate efficacy in assisting AYAs adjust to chronic illness.
Keywords: chronic illness, adolescent, young adult, psychological adaptation, intervention studies
Supplemental materials: http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025977.supp
Recent estimates indicate that /H1101120–30% of adolescents in
Western countries are living with a chronic illness, and in 10–13%this condition significantly limits their daily functioning (Yeo &Sawyer, 2005). By definition, chronic illness has a biological,cognitive or psychological basis, persists for over a year, imposes
significant restrictions on aspects of functioning and requires com-pensatory or assistive care, support, medication, or other interven-
tions (Stein, Bauman, Westbrook, Coupey, & Ireys, 1993). For ado-lescents and young adults (AYAs), the ongoing management ofchronic illness can impose physical, emotional, and financial depen-dence at the time when increasing autonomy is the developmentalgoal. During this stage, individuals engage in identity formation,establish social competence, balance family and peer influences,
develop and explore sexuality, and adapt to emerging intellectualabilities (Havighurst, 1972). Not achieving these significant mile-stones places individuals at heightened risk for poor adaptation withintheir future adult roles (Orr, Weller, Satterwhite, & Pless, 1984).
Across chronic illnesses, there appear to be some common
challenges for adolescents and their families, but also some dif-ferences. While on treatment, diabetic and cancer patients, forexample, both require constant monitoring and strict adherence toa medical regimen, with little room for the risky behaviors andexperimentation that is often a part of peer relationships at this
This article was published Online First November 7, 2011.
Ursula M. Sansom-Daly, School of Psychology, University of New
South Wales, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia, and Centre forChildren’s Cancer and Blood Disorders, Sydney Children’s Hospital,Randwick, New South Wales, Australia; Michelle Peate, Prince of WalesClinical School, University of New South Wales; Claire E. Wakefield andRichard J. Cohn, Centre for Children’s Cancer and Blood Disorders,Sydney Children’s Hospital, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia, andSchool of Women’s and Children’s Health, University of New SouthWales; Richard A. Bryant, School of Psychology, University of New SouthWales.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Ursula M.
Sansom-Daly, School of Psychology, University of New South Wales,High Street, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia 2052. E-mail:ursula@unsw.edu.auHealth Psychology © 2011 American Psychological Association
2012, Vol. 31, No. 3, 380–393 0278-6133/11/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/a0025977
380
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
stage (Morgan, Davies, Palmer, & Plaster, 2010; Sawyer, Drew, &
Duncan, 2007). Once treatment for the cancer patients is complete,they only require intermittent follow-up, but live with the ongoingpossibility of life-threatening events, and must also deal with thelate effects of therapy. Consequently, cancer survivors experienceongoing illness-related demands and challenges into adolescenceand young adulthood, even if treatment is completed at a youngage. Patients with Sickle Cell Disease (SCD; Thompson et al.,2003), Juvenile Idiopathic Arthritis (JIA; Ireys, Sills, Kolodner, &Walsh, 1996), Cystic Fibrosis (Harrop, 2007), and asthma (Horner,1995) have pain and uncertainty regarding future medical events asconstant reminders of vulnerability for future episodes, which maycomplicate the developmental task of planning the future (Taylor,Gibson, & Franck, 2008). Pain and physical side effects, includingdisease-related changes in appearance, and extended time awayfrom peers, may also contribute to disruptions to normal social,and identity development (Evan, Kaufman, Cook, & Zeltzer,2006). The experience of developmentally advanced psychologicalissues, such as vulnerability to illness and mortality, may com-pound these disruptions (Taylor et al., 2008). Such stressors mayplace a great deal of strain on AYAs’ emerging coping skills asthey attempt to reconcile the constraints of their disease withnormal life as a young person.
It appears that a young person’s capacity to negotiate the effects
of their illness, while navigating complex social relationships, iskey to successfully managing these developmental disruptions(Olsson et al., 2003). Studies suggest that interventions that aretailored, age-specific, and developmentally appropriate are likelyto be better received by AYAs (Zebrack, Chesler, & Kaplan,2010). Thus, addressing the effects of chronic illness with appro-priate therapeutic techniques may reduce the psychological impactof the experience. Unfortunately, there is a paucity of age-specificinterventions that address psychological adaptation among chronicillness populations (Sawyer, Drew, Yeo, & Britto, 2007). Thisapparent gap in the literature means that many AYAs currently donot receive evidence-based psychological support as part of rou-tine care. The tendency for AYAs to ‘fall through the cracks’ inhealth care systems split between pediatric and adult facilities mayfurther constrain developmentally appropriate care and exacerbatethe stress inherent in living with chronic illness during this stage(Kennedy & Sawyer, 2008).
Although there have been some recent reviews of interventions
for adolescents with specific chronic illnesses, such as cancer(Seitz, Besier, & Goldbeck, 2009), small reported numbers havelimited the quantity and quality of interventions that could beincluded in these. Chronic illnesses exert certain common devel-opmental disruptions and psychosocial consequences on familiesand individuals (Eiser, 2003; Sawyer et al., 2007; Stein & Jessop,1989). Accordingly, there are significant advantages to synthesiz-ing research evidence across distinct literatures. In particular,delineating the common, efficacious intervention elements acrossdisease groups may highlight what is useful to include in accept-able and developmentally appropriate programs of psychologicalsupport for AYAs living with chronic illness. Such evidence mayalso facilitate the borrowing of evidence-based models of psycho-logical support for AYAs between illness populations.
The objective of this review was therefore to provide a system-
atic overview of all published, rigorously evaluated psychologicalinterventions for AYAs living with a chronic illness. Three ques-
tions were addressed:
1. What are the characteristics of the available psychologi-
cal interventions targeted at AYAs with chronic illness,and what is their quality?
2. Which of these appear efficacious in addressing psycho-
logical adaptation?
3. What sample, methodological, or intervention character-
istics are common among studies achieving positive ef-fects on psychological outcomes?
Method
Gold-standard systematic review procedures were followed, for
the purposes of synthesizing the available evidence, and drawingrecommendations for future research (Liberati et al., 2009). Thisinvolved determining, a priori, a complete set of inclusion andexclusion criteria, conducting a rigorous literature search acrossmore than one database, using a standardized, independent abstractscreening and study selection process, clearly documenting ex-cluded studies, and using consistent data extraction methods.
Search Strategy
Five electronic databases were searched, limited to human stud-
ies published in the English language. In each database searchesfor terms defining the age group (e.g., “Adolescent,” “YoungAdult”), the disease types (e.g., “Neoplasms,” “Diabetes Melli-tus”), the outcomes of interest (e.g., “Adaptation, Psychological”),and the studies of interest (e.g., “Intervention Studies”) were run,and combined. Online Appendix 1 presents a complete list ofdatabase-specific search terms used.
Study Inclusion Criteria
Studies published in a peer-reviewed journal from January 1979
to December 2010, which evaluated a psychosocial interventionfor AYAs with a chronic illness were included in this review.Diseases included were cancer, diabetes, cystic fibrosis, SCD,asthma, or JIA. These diseases were selected because of the sharedcommon elements in their experience, such as an uncertain andongoing disease course. Certain conditions were excluded becausethey possess qualitatively distinct features from the other chronicillnesses. Chronic pain was excluded because of the dominance ofdaily aversive sensations and the frequent presence of chronic painsyndrome. Chronic fatigue syndrome was excluded because it isdistinguished from the other conditions, which are associated withpotential life-threat (e.g., see Eccleston, Morley, Williams, Yorke,& Mastroyannopoulou, 2002; Whiting et al., 2001). HIV/AIDSinterventions were excluded because of their preventative healthand behavioral change focus. Studies were included if:
1. All study participants were aged between 10 and 30 years
during participation, regardless of their age at diagnosis.This broad definition was designed to capture all relevantinterventions, including any drawing on the WorldHealth Organization’s definition of adolescence from 10381 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
years of age (World Health Organization, 1977), interna-
tional studies (Treadgold & Kuperberg, 2010), and thosethat predated the “AYA” coinage and age definitions(Hayes-Lattin, Mathews-Bradshaw, & Siegel, 2010).
2. Curative and/or ongoing disease management remained
the overarching goal of the medical treatment being re-ceived by participants. Interventions developed for end-stage, palliative care patients were excluded.
3. Interventions were specifically designed to affect change
in at least one psychosocial aspect of living with achronic illness, ascertained through a study’s stated aimsand outcome measures. Disease knowledge alone was notconsidered sufficient for inclusion; however, it is in-cluded where studies measured it alongside adjustmentoutcomes, to gauge the breadth of a program’s efficacy.Family interventions were included provided that theyreported outcomes separately for AYAs; parent outcomesare not discussed here.
4. Studies used a quantitative, two-group controlled design,
involving the administration of standardized measures attwo or more time-points. Many inpatient settings pre-cluded strictly randomized designs. These were not ex-cluded; however, study randomization data was recorded.
Only the most recent published report of any given original
intervention was included.
Data Extraction
The resulting 1,233 abstracts were screened by two researchers
(U.S.D., M.P.) using the inclusion criteria listed above. Interraterreliability was 96% (49 disagreements out of 1,233 abstracts).Full-text articles were extracted for all abstracts that either ap-peared eligible to at least one reviewer, or which did not yieldsufficient information for review, to confirm eligibility ( n/H1100587).
Consensus between the two authors was achieved by discussingand clarifying details against the full-text article. Studies not fittingthe inclusion criteria were discarded (see Figure 1). To augmentthe electronic search, reference lists of included studies and tableof contents of key journals were examined manually to identifyadditional relevant studies. This led to the inclusion of a further 10articles.
The data shown in Table 1 were extracted from each eligible
trial, and reviewed by two authors (U.S.D., M.P.). Detailed infor-mation on sample, methodology, intervention, and outcome mea-sures, was examined. Although the principles outlined by Oxman(1995) guided study selection and analysis, the usefulness of ameta-analysis was constrained by the few consistent measuresused both across psychological constructs and studies (Lipsey &Wilson, 2001). Similarly, indices of clinically significant changewere not calculated. This was due the lack of available data onnormative versus clinical adjustment across many disease-specificmeasures, as well as the difficulty in ascertaining “clinical” changein populations that may only be distressed at subclinical levels(Van Dongen-Melman, De Groot, Hahlen, & Verhulst, 1996).However, Cohen’s effect sizes were calculated where possible toindex practical significance, where d/H11005.2, .5, and .8 suggest asmall, medium, and large effects, respectively (Thalheimer &
Cook, 2002).
Fisher’s exact test was used post hoc to compare the relative
frequency of particular intervention characteristics according towhether they had been successful in achieving at least one signif-icant outcome, or not.
Intervention Classification
In line with Plante et al. (2001), interventions were classified
according to their primary goals and intended outcomes as (a)emotional/peer-support, (b) educational/psychoeducational pro-grams, and (c) skills-based programs. Emotional/peer-supportgroups were defined as those aiming to improve psychologicaladaptation to illness through the provision of contact and discus-sion with peers, and emphasized support rather than the acquisitionof knowledge, skills, or medical symptom-reduction. Camp pro-grams were subsumed under the peer-support category, on thebasis of their recreational group focus. Educational interventionsaimed to enhance illness adjustment through the provision ofinformation about the illness, its management, and related psycho-logical issues. Skill-based programs were characterized as thoseincluding explicit and often practical training in adaptive copingstrategies, to deal with current or future stressors. These werefurther classified according to whether they involved a parent togauge the impact of family inclusion for AYAs.1233 abstracts 
meeting search 
criteria across 
5 databasesExcluded due to study factors: 
- Not an intervention study –e.g., needs, distress 
prevalence, instrument development ( n=541)
- Medical interventions, treatment & genetics studies ( n=188)
- Public health & risk prevention studies ( n=65) 
439 publications
Excluded due to intervention factors: 
- Other primary condition (e.g., obesity) ( n=105)
- Model of care/clinical guidelines only ( n=90)
- No control group ( n=30)
- Qualitative evaluation only ( n=20)
Excluded due to cohort factors: 
- Participants too young (i.e., pediatric) ( n=23)
- Participants too old (i.e., adult/older adult) ( n=34)
- AYA not the patient (e.g., child of parent with 
cancer) ( n=23)
- AYA not targeted by intervention program ( n=23)194 publications
91 publications
Excluded due to other factors: 
- Review article ( n=28)
- Case studies ( n=22)
- Dissertation ( n=10)
- Editorial comments/letters ( n=10)
-B o o k  ( n=6)
15 publications
Other sources of eligible articles : manual
search of reference lists of relevant articles, 
relevant authors, and table contents of key 
journals ( n=10 additional articles)
25 publications
Figure 1. Reasons for exclusion of publications resulting from database
search ( n/H110051,208).382 SANSOM-DALY, PEATE, WAKEFIELD, BRYANT, AND COHN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Methodological Quality
The quality of each included study was assessed by two authors
(U.S.D., M.P.). The quality assessment was based on Jackson,Cheater, and Reid’s (2008) criteria, where aspects of the theoret-ical basis, methodology, statistical analysis, and reporting areassessed. Studies were assessed categorically as meeting eachequally weighted criterion (yes, no, or unclear; Table 2). Interraterreliability was 95% (16 discrepancies across 325 criteria). Discrep-ancies between raters were resolved through discussion with clar-ification against the full-text articles where particular details werein question. The presence of intervention manualization and treat-ment fidelity checks were also examined. This involves the clearspecification and standardization of intervention content and de-livery, with independent ratings of the program’s adherence to this(Mohr et al., 2009). Study quality was not a prerequisite for studyinclusion, but is discussed below.
Results
Research Question 1: What Are the Characteristics of
the Available Psychological Interventions Targeted atAYAs With Chronic Illness, and What Is TheirQuality?
The 25 included studies are summarized in Table 3 (full study
details are available as online supplementary material). Thirteenincluded AYAs with diabetes, 7 with cancer, 2 with JIA, 1 with
asthma, 1 with SCD, and 1 with both asthma and SCD. No eligiblestudies in cystic fibrosis emerged. Participant ages ranged from10–29 years old. Parents were involved in six studies. Samplesizes ranged from N/H1100512 to 375.
Between disease groups, there were some differences in the
types of interventions utilized. Diabetes interventions had a greaterproportion of skills-based interventions (8/13 or 62%) of whichthree (38%) involved the family. By contrast, in the AYA cancerliterature only two interventions (of seven; 29%) specifically tar-geted the development of coping skills, one of which included thefamily. The remainder of cancer interventions were spread overpeer-support (2/5, 40%) and educational models (3/5, 60%). The
other illnesses (asthma, SCD, and JIA) only received educationaland skills-based programs.
The quality of the studies was generally high (see Table 2).
Quality assessment scores (2008) ranged from 42.3% (Study 1, aslisted in Table 3) to 96.2% (Study 3). All studies provided a cleardescription of their aims/objectives, and most clearly describedtheir study sample, data collection, and analysis. However, onlysix studies reported appointing a consumer representative (a lay-person living with the chronic illness) to inform study develop-ment (Studies 3, 9, 10, 18, 19, 23; Table 3). Only 32%, most incancer, reported using a theoretical framework to guide theirresearch (Studies 1, 2, 8, 10, 12, 13, 18, 21), although severalothers explicitly referenced cognitive, behavioral principles (seeOnline Appendixes). Nine studies (36%) did not adequately doc-ument recruitment data.
Study randomization and control group type can be seen in
Table 3. The majority of studies were randomized ( n/H1100519).
Twelve programs used either waitlist or usual care controls. At-tention or support control groups, which involve contact withresearchers or clinicians to control for the generic benefits of“nonspecific” therapeutic effects (Mohr et al., 2009), were used in10 studies. Among the remaining studies, one used patient-referredfriends as controls (Study 3), one study used a historical patientcontrol (Study 4), and one study did not provide details (Study 1).Three diabetes interventions conducted three-arm trials includingboth a wait-list or usual control and an alternative form of psy-chological intervention (Studies 22, 24, 25). The only studiesreporting intervention fidelity checks ( n/H110057; Studies 14, 15, 20,
21, 23–25), explicit intervention manualization ( n/H110054; Studies 20,
21, 24, 25), and control group manualization, such as specifyinggeneric patient education or emotional support ( n/H110055; Studies 13,
17, 20, 24, 25) were all skills-based interventions, suggestingadherence to stricter methods in this type of intervention.Table 1
Details Extracted From Each Eligible Trial
Category Details
Study type First author, year of publication, country
Sample characteristic Sample size at time of randomization, chronic illness(es) included, age range (years), whether parents includedIntervention characteristic Intervention duration, frequency and length of intervention sessions, mode of intervention delivery, type/trainin go f
interventionist
Study methods Length of longest follow-up, comparison group type, randomization, outcome measures usedIntervention outcomes Reported statistical significance of between-group differences ( pvalues), study group means
Table 2
Percentage of Studies Scoring a ‘Yes’ for Quality AssessmentCriteria (Jackson et al., 2008)
All studies
N/H1100525 %
Explicit theoretical framework
identified/literature review 9 36.0
Clear aims and objectives 25 100.0Clear description of setting 21 84.0Clear description of sample 23 92.0Appropriate sampling procedure 23 92.0Clear description of data collection 24 96.0Clear description of data analysis 24 96.0Provision of recruitment data 17 68.0Provision of attrition data 20 80.0Valid and reliable outcomes 19 76.0Findings reported for each outcome 22 88.0Evidence of consumer involvement 6 24.0Strengths and limitations stated 22 88.0Mean % of maximum possible score 83.1383 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
The measures used across studies varied widely, even within
disease groups. For example, diabetes studies used 41 differentmeasures in total, over half of which were diabetes-specific. Sim-ilarly, 28 different measures were used across the 6 interventionstudies in AYAs with cancer, including several purposely de-signed, yet nonvalidated measures. Even disregarding particularmeasures used, at least 18 different psychological constructs wereused across studies to index ‘adjustment,’ including: anxiety, de-pression, posttraumatic stress symptoms, coping, self-efficacy,locus of control, perceived stress, quality of life (QoL), goalhindrance, attitudes, happiness, hopefulness, hopelessness, self-esteem, symptom distress, perceived social support, body image,and sexual concerns. There were also some inconsistencies in thematch between constructs measured and intervention type. Onlysix of eight (75%) interventions classified as educational includeda measure of knowledge or perceived knowledge (several of whichwere nonvalidated), while only four of six (67%) family focusedinterventions included a measure of family adjustment. Most stud-ies (18 of 25) included follow-up measurements beyond the im-mediately posttreatment period; however, these varied from 1 to 24months postintervention. Few studies ( n/H110055) incorporated out-
come measures administered by blind or independent assessors(Studies 9, 10, 15, 16, 25).
Research Question 2: Which Interventions Appear
Efficacious in Addressing Psychological Adaptation?
Nineteen (out of 25; 76%) interventions yielded a significant
effect on at least one psychological outcome measure. Thisdropped to 14 studies (56%) if studies achieving significant effectsonly on purposely designed, nonvalidated measures were ex-cluded.
Nondirective emotional and peer-support. Four interven-
tions were identified with the common objective of facilitatingpsychological adjustment through peer support, of which three(75%) showed significant effects on at least one psychologicalmeasure. These studies included a mentoring program for AYAswith diabetes (Study 1), and two other residential camps deliveringpeer-support and education (Studies 3, 4). The remaining cancerpeer-support group did not yield any significant results (Study 2).Table 3
Summary of Included Trials
No. First author (year) Country N Randomized ControlSample: Condition
(ages)Intervention
duration†Longest follow-up
Emotional/peer-support group interventions
1 Daley et al. (1992) USA 54 Yes Unknown Diabetes (12–16 years) 10 months Postintervention only
2 Heiney et al. (1988) USA 14 No Usual care Cancer (14–19 years) 6 weeks Postintervention only3 Schwartz et al. (1999) USA 76 No Healthy Cancer (18–29 years) 3 days 2 months4 Wang et al. (2008) USA 182 No Historical Diabetes (12–18 years) 20 days 3–10 months
Educational/psychoeducational interventions
5 Andre et al. (2001) Sweden 17
/H11569No Usual care JIA (13–19 years) 1 day (8 hr) 4 months
6 Canada et al. (2007) USA 21 Yes Waitlist Cancer (15–25 years) 3 months 3 months7 De Wit et al. (2008) Netherlands 91 Yes Usual care Diabetes (13–17 years) 12 months 12 months8 Hazzard et al. (2002) USA 38
/H11569Yes Attention Asthma and SCD
(13–18 years)3 days Postintervention only
9 Jones et al. (2010) USA 65 Yes Attention Cancer (12–18 years) 3 months 3 months
10 Kato et al. (2008) USA 375 Yes Attention Cancer (13–29 years) 3 months 3 months11 Løding et al. (2008) Norway 19 Partially Attention Diabetes (13–17 years) 10 months 18–21 months12 Rogers Fischl et al. (2010) USA 88 Yes Usual care Diabetes (13–20 years) 9 months Postintervention only
Skills-based interventions (AYAs alone)
13 Boardway et al. (1993) USA 19 Yes Usual care Diabetes (12–17 years) 3 months 9 months
14 Channon et al. (2007) UK 66 Yes Attention Diabetes (14–17 years) 12 months 24 months15 Grey et al. (2000) USA 77 Yes Attention Diabetes (12–20 years) 12 months 12 months16 Hains et al. (2000) USA 14 Yes Waitlist Diabetes (12–15 years) 6 weeks 1 month17 Hampel et al. (2003) Germany 19
/H11569No Usual care Asthma (14–16 years) 4 weeks Postintervention only
18 Hinds et al. (2000) USA 78 Yes Attention Cancer (12–21 years) 1 /H1100340 min session 6 months
19 Whittemore et al. (2010) USA 12 Yes Attention Diabetes (13–16 years) 5 weeks 6 months
Skills-based interventions (parent/family inclusion)
20 Barakat et al. (2010) USA 53 Yes Attention SCD (12–18 years) 10 weeks 12 months
21 Kazak et al. (2004) USA 150 Yes Waitlist Cancer (10–19 years) 1 day 3–5 months22 Satin et al. (1989) USA 32 Yes Waitlist Diabetes (12–19 years) 6 weeks 6 weeks23 Stinson et al. (2010) Canada 46 Yes Attention JIA (12–18 years) 12 weeks Postintervention only24 Wysocki et al. (2001) USA 119 Yes Usual care Diabetes (12–17 years) 3 months 12 months25 Wysocki et al. (2006) USA 104 Yes Usual care Diabetes (11–16 years) 6 months 12 months
Note. JIA/H11005juvenile idiopathic arthritis; SCD /H11005Sickle Cell Disease.
/H11569Asterisk denotes AYAs being a sub-group of an overall sample (e.g., child and adolescent) for whom outcomes were analyzed separately.†Including
booster sessions.384 SANSOM-DALY, PEATE, WAKEFIELD, BRYANT, AND COHN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Education and/or psychoeducation models. Eight educa-
tional interventions were captured. One multisession, counselingintervention delivered by health care professionals yielded nosignificant results on QoL (Study 11). However, the other educa-tional interventions ( n/H110057 or 88%) showed small to very large
improvements on at least one of their outcome measures. Thedomains of improvement differed greatly between interventions,and included psychological domains such as coping, QoL, andsymptoms of distress. Two psychosexual/reproductive-health fo-cused interventions (Studies 6, 12) yielded significant effects (of atleast medium size) in areas related to reproductive and sexualknowledge, as well as attitudes, intentions, and confidence. Two ofthe three computer-mediated interventions, both in AYAs withcancer (Studies 9, 10), achieved positive effects on health locus ofcontrol and disease-related knowledge; a third computer-basedintervention in SCD and asthma patients showed significant effectson a pediatric coping measure (Study 8).
Adaptation and coping skills training interventionsCoping skills for AYAs alone. Four (57%), of the seven
skills-based interventions, showed medium to very large signifi-cant effects. Most included regular practice of cognitive–behavioral techniques such as cognitive restructuring, problem-solving, goal-setting, and role-playing coping strategies, across aminimum of four sessions (Studies 13–17, 19). Mostly, the group-based, multisession programs showed at least one positive out-come (Studies 13, 15, 17). Two interventions were deliveredindividually; one single-session intervention teaching self-carecoping strategies to cancer patients showed no positive effects(Study 18). The other, a multisession motivational interviewingprogram for AYAs with diabetes, showed several positive resultsat follow-up (Study 14).
Multifamily/parent involvement in coping skills. Several
skills-based programs also included parents and other family mem-bers. Many of these interventions incorporated elements of behav-ioral family systems therapy, and utilized the multifamily discus-sion group format of delivery (Studies 21, 22, 24, 25). Five of thesix family focused coping skills programs (83%) achieved mediumto very large positive effects. However, of the four studies thatmeasured family variables (e.g., family conflict, communication)only two showed significant effects on these measures.
The majority of the multisession family interventions in diabetes
(Studies 22, 24, 25) and JIA (Study 23) attained positive outcomeson some measures, in particular those concerning family or parent-adolescent dimensions, as well as QoL. Parents had varied levelsof active involvement; however, two trial diabetes programs thatincorporated a particularly active role for parents (through parent“simulation” of diabetes management) both reported some positiveresults (Studies 22, 25).
Research Question 3: What Sample, Methodological,
or Intervention Characteristics Are Common AmongStudies Achieving Positive Effects on PsychologicalOutcomes?
Table 4 depicts the proportion of interventions that appeared
successful, according to particular study characteristics they pos-sessed. For the purposes of this analysis, the achievement of atleast one significant positive outcome on a psychological measurewas used as the general index of study “success.” When examinedacross all chronic illnesses, few significant differences in the
characteristics of successful versus unsuccessful interventionsemerged (see Table 4 for pvalues). However, several trends
emerged, which may nevertheless explain some of the variance inintervention efficacy.
Sample characteristics. Although only a minority of trials in
this review ( n/H110054) targeted AYAs selected for greater need of
intervention (i.e., secondary prevention) there appeared to be littledifference between the efficacy of primary and secondary preven-tion trials. In fact, when limited to validated outcome measures,there was a trend for slightly more primary prevention-level trialsto achieve significant effects ( p/H11005.600). Studies that included the
family appeared to show significant results more often than thosewithout this inclusion, although this was nonsignificant.
Methodology characteristics. Many of the included studies
had small sample sizes and consequently may have been under-powered to detect significant effects. As a crude comparison, therewas a higher rate of intervention success among interventions withat least 25 participants per group. Further, among successful in-terventions the average sample size was N/H1100586 (SD/H1100583.4)
compared with N/H1100532 (SD/H1100527.5; p/H11005.133) among interventions
yielding no significant effects. Random assignment to groups andtreatment fidelity checks also appeared to be more common tointerventions showing significant effects. In addition, there was atrend toward fewer studies including a follow-up /H113506 months
detecting significant effects than those with shorter follow-ups.Consistent with this, the average longest follow-up of studies withat least one significant outcome was (nonsignificantly) shorter thanin studies that had not achieved this (5.7 months, SD/H110056.4, vs. 7.4
months, SD/H110057.3; p/H11005.579). Regarding the measurement of
intervention success, a somewhat higher proportion of studies thatincluded generic psychological (as opposed to disease-specific)measures, and those that included a measure of positive adjustmentor resilience, showed significant effects.
Intervention characteristics. Interventions with six or more
sessions over time appeared to have somewhat higher successrates. Successful studies had significantly more intervention ses-sions on average than did studies with no significant effects ( M/H11005
8.4, SD/H110056.3 compared with M/H110055.3, SD/H110052.9; p/H11005.022).
Time-span of contact also appeared to be a powerful factor:interventions involving contact for more than 3 months demon-strated a greater success rate, and this approached significance.The average length of treatment among successful interventionswas 4.7 months (or 18.8 weeks, SD/H1100519.9) compared with 3.0
months (or 11.9 weeks, SD/H1100516.1) in studies that showed no
effects ( p/H11005.380). Neither face-to-face contact nor peer-to-peer
delivery (in groups of AYAs) appeared to significantly impactintervention success.
Several specific intervention elements emerged as potentially
important for intervention success. When specific types of “copingskills” were examined, it appears that teaching skills, and partic-ularly communication skills, are key to intervention success. Insuch skills-based interventions, the delivery of this content by apsychology- or counseling-trained professional also seemed toconfer a greater likelihood of success. Incorporating role-play orother practical components ‘in-session,’ as well as implementinghomework practice exercises out of session also appeared to be acommon element to successful interventions, though again, neitherdifference was significant.385 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Table 4
Sample, Methodology, and Intervention Characteristics of Trials Reporting /H113501 Significant Effect on a Psychological Outcome
Measure
nAchieved significant
result on /H113501 outcomeSignificance of difference
in proportion
n(%) p-value
Sample characteristics
Selected for distress levels/higher need
Yes 4 3 (75) 1.000No 21 16 (76)
Included parent/family
Yes 6 5 (83) 1.000No 19 14 (74)
Methodology characteristics
n/H1135025 per group
Yes 12 10 (83) 0.390No 13 8 (62)
Randomized assignment to groups
Yes 20 16 (80) 0.562No 5 3 (60)
Intervention incorporated fidelity checks
Yes 7 6 (86) 0.637No 18 13 (72)
Attention control group
Yes 9 6 (67) 0.630No 16 13 (81)
Length of postintervention follow-up /H113506 months
Yes 10 6 (60) 0.175No 15 13 (87)
Included disease-specific psychological measures (not simply measures
of disease knowledge)
Yes 18 13 (72) 0.637No 7 6 (86)
Included measures of positive adjustment or resilience
/H11569
Yes 17 13 (77) 0.630No 8 5 (63)
Intervention characteristics
Intervention duration /H113506 sessions spaced over more than 1 day
Yes 14 11 (79) 1.000No 11 8 (73)
Contact over /H113503 months (including booster sessions)
Yes 13 12 (92) 0.073No 12 7 (58)
Intervention delivery includes face-to-face contact
Yes 21 16 (76) 1.000No 4 3 (75)
Intervention involved AYAs in groups (AYA to AYA peer interaction)
Yes 11 8 (73) 1.000No 14 11 (79)
Intervention involves the formal teaching of problem-solving skills
Yes 12 9 (75) 1.000No 13 10 (77)
Intervention involves the formal teaching of communication skills
Yes 10 9 (90) 0.345No 15 10 (67)
Intervention included role-play or practice components ‘in session’
Yes 14 11 (79) 1.000No 11 8 (73)
Intervention included homework or practice exercises between sessions
Yes 6 5 (83) 1.000No 19 14 (74)
Delivered by a professional with psychology/counseling training
(skills-based interventions only)
Yes 10 8 (80) 0.203No 3 1 (33)
/H11569Included measures of coping, self-efficacy, adjustment, role skills, self-esteem, hope, happiness, locus of control.386 SANSOM-DALY, PEATE, WAKEFIELD, BRYANT, AND COHN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
In addition to yielding the most psychological interventions, and
the only interventions evaluated in a three-group controlled design,diabetes programs demonstrated a higher rate of success (78%with/H113501 significant result) relative to cancer interventions (71%).
Relative to interventions in cancer and other diseases, diabetesinterventions showed a significantly greater proportion of studieswith: follow up of at least 6 months (8/13; p/H11005.041), teaching of
problem-solving skills (13/13; p/H11005.039), and a higher proportion
of use of illness- (diabetes) specific psychological measures (12/13;p/H11005.030). Diabetes programs also showed trends toward more
studies where participants were selected according to level ofdistress/need (4/13 compared with 0/12 in other diseases; p/H11005
.096), more studies utilizing randomized assignment to groups(12/13, p/H11005.160), and greater implementation of homework prac-
tice between sessions (5/13 compared with 1/12 in other diseases;p/H11005.160).
Discussion
The experience of chronic illness during adolescence and young
adulthood may have lasting implications for individuals’ develop-ment and progression into well-functioning adulthood. Synthesiz-ing evidence across studies in AYAs with chronic illnesses mayinform the selection of viable, evidence-based models of psycho-logical intervention to ensure positive adjustment in this popula-tion. To this end, this review examined 25 psychosocial interven-tions for AYAs living with cancer, diabetes, JIA, asthma, andSCD. Relative to the overall scope of the search, the number ofappropriate interventions included was small, indicating that thereremains a paucity of rigorously evaluated psychological interven-tions for this group. It is encouraging to note, however, that almosthalf of the included interventions ( n/H1100511 or 44%) were published
in the past 5 years; this may indicate growing attention to thispopulation.
Implications for Future Intervention Studies
The majority of intervention studies included in this review
achieved positive effects on at least one psychological measure.Studies that measured positive growth (e.g., coping, self-efficacy,well being) rather than only indexing distress levels seemed tohave a higher proportion of significant outcomes, suggesting thatboth aspects to adjustment are important to assess in this generallyresilient group. Further, across intervention types it seems that thelevel of “match” between active therapeutic elements and targetoutcomes is important in gauging intervention efficacy. There wasa great degree of variability and some inconsistency apparent inhow psychological distress and adjustment was measured in thissample of studies. Not all educational interventions measuredknowledge outcomes, and not all family interventions indexedadjustment at the family level. Studies that achieved positiveoutcomes often appeared to have a clearer link between theirmeasures and intervention components, such as examining stresslevels in stress management training programs (e.g., Boardway,Delamater, Tomakowsky, & Gutai, 1993), and diabetes-relatedconflict in programs that specifically targeted this (e.g., Wysocki,Greco, Harris, Bubb, & White, 2001; Wysocki et al., 2006). Bycontrast, educational interventions often did not significantlychange psychological or interpersonal outcomes. Most studies
already index multiple outcome measures; however, future inter-vention studies should more clearly delineate, measure, and reportboth the proposed mechanisms expected to underlie interventionsuccess, as well as the outcomes reflective of this change. Thismay be assisted through designing studies scaffolded by a specifictheoretical framework. Although the designation of a theoreticalframework does not guarantee the delivery of positive outcomes,the presence of an overarching theory in guiding interventiondesign should entail a thorough consideration of what key ele-ments are expected to affect change, how these may best bemodified, and how process factors may be measured in assess-ment.
Several critical program features also emerged. A key finding of
this review is the importance of teaching skills—particularly com-munication skills—and including practical (e.g., role-play, home-work exercises) elements both in- and between sessions. Unlikepeer-support programs, in skills-based interventions, participantsnot only gain benefits through sharing disease-related thoughts andemotions, but also by learning ways to identify and change mal-adaptive thought and behavior patterns. Although the majority ofthese programs were delivered in a group format, Channon et al.’s(2007) individual-based, motivational interviewing interventiondemonstrated positive results, suggesting that the active benefits ofthis model may be successfully adapted to different groups. Thefinding that skills-based interventions had a greater “success rate”when delivered by a psychology or counseling trained professionalmay also relate back to these practical elements. Discipline-specific training in these professions may further increase thelikelihood that modeling, role-playing, and other interactive prac-tice elements may be used in an intervention, or enhance theinterventionist’s confidence in doing so.
Further, interventions which are multisession in format and
involve contact over a longer time period appear more likely to besuccessful. Therapeutic contact over a longer period of time maybe essential to the development, practice, and application of skills,in a manner which is more gradual, tailored to participants’ needs,and scaffolded by a greater level of interventionist and groupsupport. This may explain the emergence of not only disease-specific gains but also evidence of general adaptation in two suchinterventions (Grey, Boland, Davidson, Li, & Tamborlane, 2000;Hampel, Rudolph, Stachow, & Petermann, 2003). By contrast,shorter interventions may necessitate a more didactic, information-delivery format. This may not be optimal if the goal is to facilitatethe practical acquisition of behavioral skills.
In this review it did not appear that the success of
interventions—skills-based or otherwise—was linked to partici-pant selection methods. The similar success rates between primaryand the few secondary trials in this review may reflect the vulner-ability of this population as a whole (Varni, Limbers, & Bur-winkle, 2007). This may also attest to the potential benefits ofbuilding coping skills in a preventative capacity in this group, tobuffer young people from future stress. However, given that noneof the included studies screened for baseline psychological vari-ables such as distress or coping, strong conclusions cannot bedrawn regarding the usefulness of preintervention screening.
Despite evidence highlighting the importance of peers for AYAs
with chronic illness, the peer support-focused interventions in this 387 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
review did not demonstrate consistently positive results. In fact,
across all intervention types, programs delivered in groups ofAYAs were not more likely to show improved psychologicaloutcomes. Compared with the skills-based interventions, interven-tion manualization and fidelity checks were reported less often bypeer-support group trials. This makes it difficult to discern the keyelements involved in such interventions and the relative contribu-tions of nonspecific (e.g., peer-support) versus specific (e.g., pos-itive reframing) intervention elements to a program’s success orlack thereof. Peer-support groups also tended not to be random-ized, not to include long follow-ups, and had varying types ofcontrol groups. These factors mean that at present it is difficult toestimate the potential of peer-support groups to positively enhanceadjustment outcomes of AYAs with chronic illness.
While a peer-focus did not appear to enhance positive adjust-
ment outcomes, parent or family inclusion did appear to lead tobetter outcomes among the few studies that incorporated it. Theseresults are consistent with the reciprocal importance of familyfunctioning to a young person’s coping, as well as the effects of ayoung person’s chronic illness on the family (Rait et al., 1992).Targeting illness-related distress and adjustment also seems ap-propriate given some evidence supporting the concordant nature ofclinical, intrafamilial posttraumatic stress symptomatology, andthe associations that this may have with general family functioning(Alderfer, Navsaria, & Kazak, 2009; Kazak, Alderfer, Rourke, etal., 2004). Given the inherent developmental challenges of thisperiod, it is likely that ongoing family pressures also contribute tothe adjustment of AYAs living with the ongoing impact of chronicillness. This may include issues such as communication regardingparent-adolescent role boundaries, discipline, and appropriate ex-pectations (Wakefield, McLoone, Goodenough, et al., 2010;Wakefield, McLoone, Sansom-Daly, et al., 2010). Several prom-ising, multisession programs have been presented here, targetingfamily adjustment, communication, and conflict (Wysocki et al.,2001, 2006) and family level posttraumatic stress symptoms (Ka-zak, Alderfer, Streisand, et al., 2004). Such programs might beusefully adapted to AYAs living with other chronic illnesses, toequip families with further skills.
Limitations
Reflective of the literature as a whole, this review was some-
what constrained by the variety of terms and definitions thatsurround the adolescent and/or young adult age group comparedwith the relatively recent coinage of the “AYA” term (Hayes-Lattin et al., 2010). Nevertheless, by adopting a comprehensivesearch strategy, and reviewing several chronic illness literatures,this study provides the broadest selection of psychological inter-ventions appropriate to this age group. This enabled us to focus onquantitative studies for which a control group and measurementacross multiple time-points was present, and is the most rigoroussynthesis of the literature currently available.
This review is limited by its inclusion of only peer-reviewed
articles published in English, thereby excluding published studiesin other languages, or unpublished work (e.g., dissertations). Thereis evidence to support the existence of publication bias in clinicalresearch, where studies with null results are less likely to bepublished (Hopewell, Loudon, Clarke, Oxman, & Dickersin,2009). Consequently, there may be evaluations of interventions for
AYAs outside the published literature, and that might have alteredor tempered the present findings. Consequently, the current findingthat the (largely successful) diabetes interventions had signifi-cantly longer average follow-ups, should be treated with caution.While it may be the case that the elements critical to interventionefficacy have been successfully distilled in the diabetes literature,the “file drawer effect” cannot be excluded. That is, studies thatachieve null results at a shorter time-point may have great diffi-culty in publishing these results even after a long-term follow-up.Publication bias may also partly explain the minority of publishedstudies across illnesses that included a long-term follow-up.
The variability of existing interventions for AYAs in their
methodological approaches, presence and type of theoretical basis,psychological targets, therapeutic strategies, and the critical time-point of intervention (e.g., cancer treatment vs. survivorship) alsolimits the conclusions that may be drawn. Similarly, few includedstudies used an attention control, to control for the generic benefitsof supportive contact. The wide variability in intervention charac-teristics observed also meant that in the present analysis, littlestatistical evidence to support the recommendation of particularintervention elements as critical to their success was possible.Consequently, the observations gleaned from the current reviewremain tentative and at the level of trends. Despite the limitationsto such post hoc analyses, the emergence of several statisticallysignificant differences in the intervention characteristics amongthe diabetes literature, compared with cancer and other chronicillnesses, suggests that there are nevertheless several interventioncharacteristics that may be more important to intervention success.These conclusions should be taken with caution, however, giventhe post hoc nature of the analyses conducted, as well as the ratherliberal criterion used to define intervention success, where onlyone statistically significant effect was required, even among trials
using multiple outcome measures.
The tendency for emotional or peer-support groups to be eval-
uated either qualitatively (using interviews or focus groups), orusing only a pre-post design without a control group (Campbell,Phaneuf, & Deane, 2004) meant that only four examples were ableto be included in this review. Evidence points to the importance ofpeer interaction in AYAs, and the increasing incorporation ofpeer-support/interaction elements in the care of AYAs with somechronic illnesses (e.g., cancer; Morgan et al., 2010). The apparentdisconnect between the increasing availability of such peer-basedinterventions, and their lack of empirical evaluation, calls forfurther study.
The conclusions of this review are also limited by several key
methodological limitations common to the AYA chronic illnessliterature. First, reflective of the relative rarity of chronic illness inAYAs, small sample sizes leading to underpowered studies appearto be the norm rather than the exception, reducing the likelihood ofeven the most rigorous trials achieving a significant result.Internet-based interventions may prove one method of recruitingmore participants from a wider area, including rural/remote loca-tions. Unfortunately, few Web-based interventions were includedin this review, and these were disparate in focus and targets.However, positive results were obtained for three online educa-tional models. Only one study (Whittemore, Gray, Lindemann,388 SANSOM-DALY, PEATE, WAKEFIELD, BRYANT, AND COHN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Ambrosino, & Jaser, 2010) evaluated an Internet-based support
group program, and was unable to detect significant effects, pos-sibly because of its small sample size. Future evidence will becritical to better evaluate the potential of Web-based models,including their capacity to deliver psychological benefits besideseducation (e.g., coping skills training).
Second, a vast array of psychosocial outcome measures appears
to be in use, both within and across the chronic illnesses. Further,several studies yielded significant effects only on disease-focusedpsychosocial questionnaires, or on purposely designed, nonvali-dated study measures, rather than on mainstream psychologicalmeasures. The appeal of disease-specific measures reflects thedearth of measures sensitive enough to detect subclinical-leveldifferences in distress between different populations (Perrin, Stein,& Drotar, 1991; Van Dongen-Melman, et al., 1996). This isdisadvantageous both empirically and clinically, as the use of suchmeasures precludes estimation of the relative success of an inter-vention, preventing its application in other groups. Future researchis needed to examine the extent to which different distress andadjustment measures are sensitive to change within differentchronic illness populations.
Finally, it is difficult to ascertain the extent to which interven-
tions are age or developmentally appropriate when large age spansare common (e.g., 12–19 years). In only a few papers weresubanalyses conducted according to smaller age ranges. This islikely impacted by small sample sizes, but is an important consid-eration when the intellectual, emotional, and psychological matu-rity of participants changes so significantly over even a few years(Petersen & Leffert, 1995). In addition, the few studies that in-cluded a consumer representative to inform the intervention con-tent and delivery suggests that, although this issue is gaining theattention of funding bodies, in research it is still not commonpractice. This may mean that crucial details pertaining to thedevelopmental appropriateness of the interventions are over-looked.
AYA Chronic Illness: Challenges for the Literature
and Future Directions
Across the chronic illnesses reviewed, research coming from the
diabetes literature appears to be the most advanced in methodolog-ical rigor, and is the only literature in which three-armed trials,comparing different “active” interventions, have been conducted.Future interventions in other chronic illnesses may benefit frommodeling their interventions on those developed in AYA diabetespopulations, and this review may be used as a guide to someparticularly useful examples. However, the extent to which thetrajectory, management, and psychological impact may be alignedacross different chronic illnesses remains poorly understood. Theremay be critical distinctions between the practical and psycholog-ical impacts of managing different conditions. Consistent with this,there is some evidence for differential effects of chronic illnesseson the health-related QoL of children and adolescents (Varni et al.,2007). For example, the experience of long-term monitoring forcancer recurrence may be quite different to the more proactivedaily monitoring of insulin required in diabetes. Each illness mayalso have its own distinctive stressors; whether regarding diet indiabetes (Huus & Enska ¨r, 2007), pain and activity levels in asthma,
JIA, and CF (Harrop, 2007; Rhee & Steeves, 2007) or physicalscarring, side effects, or sexual/reproductive late effects in cancer
survivorship (Carpentier & Fortenberry, 2010; Evan et al., 2006).Even within broad categories of illnesses (e.g., cancer) specificdiagnoses may carry distinct implications for treatment length andseverity, side effects, prognosis, and risk of medical late effectswithin illnesses. It is crucial that future research better characterizedistress and “normal adjustment” in the context of each condition.
In a similar way, it is important that future research better
conceptualize the patterns of illness-related distress and adjust-ment within families, and the extent to which family adjustmentoutcomes are intertwined across chronic illness literatures. Atpresent this is limited by the few family level studies that havebeen developed, and the widely varying models of distress, adjust-ment, and coping that are currently in use across chronic illnessliteratures. Despite the common demands of adolescence, practicalillness demands may interact with family– and parent–child dy-namics in distinct ways across conditions. This may also help toaddress the multitude of psychological models and measures cur-rently in use to gauge intervention success and individual adjust-ment.
The results presented here strongly suggest that there is a role
for skills-development in interventions for AYAs living withchronic illness. However, researchers need to consider whatparticular skills are required of AYAs to effectively managetheir specific disease. AYAs with diabetes require strict andongoing medical adherence to prevent severe complications inthe short-term or ill health later in life (Daley, 1992). AYAsliving with cancer similarly require long-term follow-up andsurveillance because of their heightened risk for medical lateeffects. However, after their defined treatment period this in-volves fewer active treatment elements, and greater emphasis istherefore placed on their capacity for the psychological matu-rity, responsibility, and self-sufficiency to independently heed
follow-up requirements in the long term (Butow et al., 2010).Such considerations may guide what is necessary to include andmeasure in an intervention.
Given the varied success of the presented interventions, deter-
mining methods of delivering such content in a way which isacceptable and effective in the AYA age group also appears anurgent priority. While face-to-face delivery did not appear essen-tial to intervention success, two of the three computer-mediatedinterventions achieved positive results. Recent evidence indicatesthat almost half of AYAs with chronic illness connect to theInternet at least multiple times weekly, and in women with chronicillness this is significantly greater than in their healthy peers (Suris,Akre, Berchtold, Belanger, & Michaud, 2010). Further, AYAsappear highly amenable to receiving psychological support deliv-ered through the Internet. One recent study, in AYAs with cancer,found that chat or support group features involving peers was thesecond-most desired Web site feature, desired by 75% of theAYAs surveyed (Schiffman, Csongradi, & Suzuki, 2008). In ad-dition to increasing the developmental appropriateness of AYAinterventions, the “portability” of such approaches may lessen thehigh rates of attrition that have been recently reported in pediatricpsychological interventions, by increasing the flexibility of inter-vention delivery and thus minimizing participant burden (Karlson& Rapoff, 2009).389 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Recommendations
One of the compelling observations from the current review is
the lack of adherence to CONSORT guidelines (Schulz, Altman, &Moher, 2010) in most published studies to date examining treat-ments for AYAs with chronic illness. The failure to ensure ran-domization, blind assessments, well-specified and manualizedtreatment protocols, and treatment fidelity checks raises questionsabout the conclusions that can be drawn from a number of thesestudies. Future intervention studies need to adhere to guidelines forreporting clinical trials (Schulz et al., 2010). The wide variety innumber and type of outcome measures evident in the AYA chronicillness literature further suggests that it will be important for futurestudies using multiple outcome measures to “register” their in-tended primary outcome measures, consistent with the CONSORTmethodology. Study registration would also ensure greater equalityin publication, and avoid the aforementioned “file drawer effect.”In addition, the following recommendations for future interventionstudies in AYA chronic illness are offered:
1. AYAs’ ability to successfully manage their chronic
illness may be boosted through the use of skills-basedprograms. Communication strategies appeared particu-larly effective, and the incorporation of in-session prac-tice and homework elements added to this. Delivery of
these practical, skills-based elements by a psychologist,counselor, or similarly trained interventionist also ap-pears important.
2. In an effort to better engage AYAs in programs target-
ing psychological adaptation, future studies may con-sider using a computer-mediated delivery format. Manysuccessful programs already-developed may be amena-ble to translation into this medium using the assistanceof video-conferencing, chat, and other interactive tech-nologies.
3. Across intervention types, it appears that length of in-
tervention contact is a key determinant of success. It isrecommended that future interventions incorporate atleast one booster session to extend the interventiontime-span to a minimum of three months, and involvemultiple (preferably /H113506) sessions over time.
4. Intervention trials should include a longer follow-up
after treatment completion (ideally be at least 12months) to assess the longevity of the developed inter-vention. This is especially important in cases of illnessrecurrence or symptom worsening.
5. Where possible, attention control groups should be used
to better distinguish the specific effects of an interven-tion from the generic benefit of receiving therapeuticattention. This is particularly important considering thedifference in treatment experience AYAs of differentages may receive at pediatric and adult centers.
6. Interventions and control groups should be manualized
as specifically as possible to enable a clearer identifi-cation of effective components, as well as easier com-
parison across studies.
7. Consulting lay consumer representatives throughout in-
tervention development and implementation is particu-larly important when working with this age group andmay increase the developmental appropriateness of in-terventions.
8. Based on evidence, a clearer linkage to an appropriate
theoretical model, and careful consideration of an inter-vention’s scope and targets, researchers should identifyoutcome measures that capture changes in areas or skillsthat are explicitly addressed by the intervention. Asdisease-specific measures do not seem to offer anysystematic advantage, researchers may wish to includeboth generic and disease-specific measures of adjust-ment. Measures that enable the identification of positivechanges or “resiliency” factors may also be particularlypowerful in demonstrating adjustment in this popula-tion.
9. Future studies should endeavor to increase sample sizes
to enable a more thorough characterization of partici-pants according to baseline coping or distress, progno-sis, treatment severity, treatment adherence, personaland family psychological history, and age. This may befacilitated by increasing multisite collaboration, and in-cluding individuals with different diseases, diagnoses,or prognoses, and controlling for these factors in later
analyses. Future intervention studies should also en-deavor to analyze outcomes according to more tightlyconfined age-brackets within the full sample.
10. Where sample sizes permit, it may be beneficial for
future studies to index the relative benefits gained byparticipants according to baseline psychological factorsrelated to an intervention’s focus. In addition to being amore cost-effective model of intervention, gaining evi-dence for a graded approach may address the issuesinherent in intervening in generally resilient populations(Kazak, 2005).
References
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the
meta-analysis.
Alderfer, M. A., Navsaria, N., & Kazak, A. E. (2009). Family functioning
and posttraumatic stress disorder in adolescent survivors of childhoodcancer. Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 717–725. doi:10.1037/
a0015996
*Andre, M., Hagelberg, S., & Stenstrom, C. H. (2001). Education in the
management of juvenile chronic arthritis. Changes in self-reported com-petencies among adolescents and parents of young children. Scandina-
vian Journal of Rheumatology, 30, 323–327.
*Barakat, L. P., Schwartz, L. A., Salamon, K. S., & Radcliffe, J. (2010). A
family-based randomized controlled trial of pain intervention for ado-lescents with sickle cell disease. Journal of Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology, 32, 540–547. doi:10.1097/MPH.0b013e3181e793f9
*Boardway, R. H., Delamater, A. M., Tomakowsky, J., & Gutai, J. P.390 SANSOM-DALY, PEATE, WAKEFIELD, BRYANT, AND COHN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
(1993). Stress management training for adolescents with diabetes. Jour-
nal of Pediatric Psychology, 18, 29–45. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/18.1.29
Butow, P., Palmer, S., Pai, A., Goodenough, B., Luckett, T., & King, M.
(2010). Review of adherence-related issues in adolescents and youngadults with cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 4800–4809.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2009.22.2802
Campbell, H. S., Phaneuf, M. R., & Deane, K. (2004). Cancer peer support
programs—Do they work? Patient Education and Counseling, 55, 3–15.
doi:10.1016/j.pec.2003.10.001
*Canada, A. L., Schover, L. R., & Li, Y. (2007). A pilot intervention to
enhance psychosexual development in adolescents and young adultswith cancer. Pediatric Blood & Cancer, 49, 824–828. doi:10.1002/
pbc.21130
Carpentier, M. Y., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010). Romantic and sexual
relationships, body image, and fertility in adolescent and young adulttesticular cancer survivors: A review of the literature. Journal of Ado-
lescent Health, 47, 115–125. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.2010.04.005
*Channon, S. J., Huws-Thomas, M. V., Rollnick, S., Hood, K., Cannings-
John, R. L., Rogers, C., & Gregory, J. W. (2007). A multicenter randomizedcontrolled trial of motivational interviewing in teenagers with diabetes.Diabetes Care, 30, 1390–1395. doi:10.2337/dc06–2260
*Daley, B. J. (1992). Sponsorship for adolescents with diabetes. Health
and Social Work, 17, 173–182.
*De Wit, M., Delemarre-Van de Waal, H. A., Bokma, J. A., Haasnoot, K.,
Houdijk, M. C., Gemke, R. J., & Snoek, F. J. (2008). Monitoring anddiscussing health-related quality of life in adolescents with Type 1diabetes improve psychosocial well-being: A randomized controlledtrial. Diabetes Care, 31, 1521–1526. doi:10.2337/dc08–0394
Eccleston, C., Morley, S., Williams, A., Yorke, L., & Mastroyannopoulou,
K. (2002). Systematic review of randomised controlled trials of psycho-logical therapy for chronic pain in children and adolescents, with asubset meta-analysis of pain relief. Pain, 99, 157–165. doi:10.1016/
S0304-3959(02)00072-6
Eiser, C. (2003). What can we learn from other illnesses? Journal of Cystic
Fibrosis, 2, 58–60. doi:10.1016/S1569-1993(03)00002-X
Evan, E. E., Kaufman, M., Cook, A. B., & Zeltzer, L. K. (2006). Sexual
health and self-esteem in adolescents and young adults with cancer.Cancer, 107, 1672–1679. doi:10.1002/cncr.22101
*Grey, M., Boland, E. A., Davidson, M., Li, J., & Tamborlane, W. V.
(2000). Coping skills training for youth with diabetes mellitus haslong-lasting effects on metabolic control and quality of life. The Journal
of Pediatrics, 137, 107–113. doi:10.1067/mpd.2000.106568
*Hains, A. A., Davies, W. H., Parton, E., Totka, J., & Amoroso-Camarata,
J. (2000). A stress management intervention for adolescents with type 1diabetes. Diabetes Educator, 26, 417–424. doi:10.1177/
014572170002600309
*Hampel, P., Rudolph, H., Stachow, R., & Petermann, F. (2003). Multi-
modal patient education program with stress management for childhoodand adolescent asthma. Patient Education & Counseling, 49, 59–66.
doi:10.1016/S0738-3991(02)00046-0
Harrop, M. (2007). Psychosocial impact of cystic fibrosis in adolescence.
Paediatric Nursing, 19, 41–45.
Havighurst, R. (1972). Developmental tasks and education (3rd ed.). New
York, NY: David McKay Co.
Hayes-Lattin, B., Mathews-Bradshaw, B., & Siegel, S. (2010). Adolescent
and young adult oncology training for health professionals: A position
statement. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 4858–4861. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2010.30.5508
*Hazzard, A., Celano, M., Collins, M., & Markov, Y. (2002). Effects of
STARBRIGHT world on knowledge, social support, and coping inhospitalized children with Sickle Cell Disease and asthma. Children’s
Health Care, 31, 69–86. doi:10.1207/S15326888CHC3101_5
*Heiney, S. P., Ruffin, J., Ettinger, R. S., & Ettinger, S. (1988). The effects
of group therapy on adolescents with cancer. [Research Support, Non-U.S. Gov’t]. Journal of the Association of Pediatric Oncology Nurses, 5,
20–24. doi:10.1177/104345428800500305
*Hinds, P. S., Quargnenti, A., Bush, A. J., Pratt, C., Fairclough, D.,
Rissmiller, G., . . . Gilchrist, G. S. (2000). An evaluation of the impactof a self-care coping intervention on psychological and clinical out-comes in adolescents with newly diagnosed cancer. European Journal of
Oncology Nursing, 4, 6–17. doi:10.1054/ejon.1999.0051
Hopewell, S., Loudon, K., Clarke, M. J., Oxman, A. D., & Dickersin, K.
(2009). Publication bias in clinical trials due to statistical significance ordirection of trial results. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews,
MR000006.
Horner, S. D. (1995). A family care approach for managing childhood
asthma. Journal of the American Academy of Nurse Practitioners, 7,
221–227. doi:10.1111/j.1745-7599.1995.tb01145.x
Huus, K., & Enska ¨r, K. (2007). Adolescents’ experience of living with
diabetes. Pediatric Nursing, 19, 29–31.
Ireys, H. T., Sills, E. M., Kolodner, K. B., & Walsh, B. B. (1996). A social
support intervention for parents of children with juvenile rheumatoidarthritis: Results of a randomized trial. Journal of Pediatric Psychology,
21,633–641. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/21.5.633
Jackson, C., Cheater, F. M., & Reid, I. (2008). A systematic review of
decision support needs of parents making child health decisions. Health
Expectations, 11, 232–251. doi:10.1111/j.1369-7625.2008.00496.x
*Jones, J. K., Kamani, S. A., Bush, P. J., Hennessy, K. A., Marfatia, A., &
Shad, A. T. (2010). Development and evaluation of an educationalinteractive CD-ROM for teens with cancer. Pediatric Blood & Cancer,
55,512–519. doi:10.1002/pbc.22608
Karlson, C. W., & Rapoff, M. A. (2009). Attrition in randomized con-
trolled trials for pediatric chronic conditions. Journal of Pediatric Psy-
chology, 34, 782–793. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsn122
*Kato, P. M., Cole, S. W., Bradlyn, A. S., & Pollock, B. H. (2008). A video
game improves behavioral outcomes in adolescents and young adultswith cancer: A randomized trial. Pediatrics, 122, e305–317. doi:
10.1542/peds.2007-3134
Kazak, A. E. (2005). Evidence-based interventions for survivors of child-
hood cancer and their families. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 30,
29–39. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsi013
Kazak, A. E., Alderfer, M. A., Rourke, M. T., Simms, S., Streisand, R., &
Grossman, J. R. (2004). Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and post-traumatic stress symptoms (PTSS) in families of adolescent childhoodcancer survivors. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 29, 211–219. doi:
10.1093/jpepsy/jsh022
*Kazak, A. E., Alderfer, M. A., Streisand, R., Simms, S., Rourke, M. T.,
Barakat, L. P., . . . Cnaan, A. (2004). Treatment of posttraumatic stresssymptoms in adolescent survivors of childhood cancer and their fami-lies: A randomized clinical trial. Journal of Family Psychology, 18,
493–504. doi:10.1037/0893-3200.18.3.493
Kennedy, A., & Sawyer, S. (2008). Transition from pediatric to adult
services: Are we getting it right? Current Opinion in Pediatrics, 20,
403–409. doi:10.1097/MOP.0b013e328305e128
Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzlaff, J., Mulrow, C., Gøtzsche, P. C.,
Ioannidis, J. P. A., . . . Moher, D. (2009). The PRISMA statement forreporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluatehealthcare interventions: Explanation and elaboration. British Medical
Journal, 339, b2700. doi:10.1136/bmj.b2700
Lipsey, M. W., & Wilson, D. B. (2001). Practical meta-analysis (Vol. 49).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
*Løding, R. N., Wold, J. E., & Skavhaug, Å. (2008). Experiences with a
group intervention for adolescents with type 1 diabetes and their parents.European Diabetes Nursing, 5, 9–14. doi:10.1002/edn.96
Mohr, D. C., Spring, B., Freedland, K. E., Beckner, V., Arean, P., Hollon,
S. D., . . . Kaplan, R. (2009). The selection and design of controlconditions for randomized controlled trials of psychological interven-391 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
tions. Psychotherapy & Psychosomatics, 78, 275–284. doi:10.1159/
000228248
Morgan, S., Davies, S., Palmer, S., & Plaster, M. (2010). Sex, drugs, and
rock ‘n’ roll: Caring for adolescents and young adults with cancer.Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 4825–4830. doi:10.1200/
JCO.2009.22.5474
Olsson, C. A., Bond, L., Johnson, M. W., Forer, D. L., Boyce, M. F., &
Sawyer, S. M. (2003). Adolescent chronic illness: A qualitative study ofpsychosocial adjustment. Annals of the Academy of Medicine Singapore,
32,43–50.
Orr, D. P., Weller, S. C., Satterwhite, B., & Pless, I. B. (1984). Psychos-
ocial implications of chronic illness in adolescence. The Journal of
Pediatrics, 104, 152–157. doi:10.1016/S0022-3476(84)80616-2
Oxman, A. (1995). Preparing and maintaining systematic reviews. In A.
Oxman (Ed.), The Cochrane Collaboration, The Cochrane Collabora-
tion Handbook. Available in the Cochrane Database of SystematicReviews. London: British Medical Journal Publishing Group.
Perrin, E. C., Stein, R. E. K., & Drotar, D. (1991). Cautions in using the
Child Behavior Checklist: Observations based on research about chil-dren with a chronic illness. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 16, 411–
421. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/16.4.411
Petersen, A. C., & Leffert, N. (1995). Developmental issues influencing
guidelines for adolescent health research: A review. Journal of Adoles-
cent Health, 17, 298–305. doi:10.1016/1054-139X(95)00184-T
Plante, W., Lobato, D., & Engel, R. (2001). Review of group interventions
for pediatric chronic conditions. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 26,
435–453. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/26.7.435
Rait, D. S., Ostroff, J. S., Smith, K., Cella, D. F., Tan, C., & Lesko, L. M.
(1992). Lives in a balance: Perceived family functioning and the psy-chosocial adjustment of adolescent cancer survivors. Family Process,
31,383–397. doi:10.1111/j.1545-5300.1992.00383.x
Rhee, H., Wenzel, J., & Steeves, R. H. (2007). Adolescents’ psychosocial
experiences living with asthma: A focus group study. Journal of Pedi-
atric Health Care, 21, 99–107. doi:10.1016/j.pedhc.2006.04.005
*Rodgers Fischl, A. F., Herman, W. H., Sereika, S. M., Hannan, M.,
Becker, D., Mansfield, M. J., . . . Charron-Prochownik, D. (2010). Im-pact of a preconception counseling program for teens with Type 1diabetes (READY-girls) on patient-provider interaction, resource utili-zation, and cost. Diabetes Care, 33, 701–705. doi:10.2337/dc09–1821
*Satin, W., L. A. Greca, A. M., Zigo, M. A., & Skyler, J. S. (1989).
Diabetes in adolescence: Effects of multifamily group intervention andparent simulation of diabetes. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 14,
259–275. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/14.2.259
Sawyer, S. M., Drew, S., & Duncan, R. (2007). Adolescents with chronic
disease–the double whammy. Australian Family Physician, 36, 622–627.
Sawyer, S. M., Drew, S., Yeo, M. S., & Britto, M. T. (2007). Adolescents
with a chronic condition: Challenges living, challenges treating. Lancet,
369, 1481–1489. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60370-5
Schiffman, J. D., Csongradi, E., & Suzuki, L. K. (2008). Internet use
among adolescent and young adults (AYA) with cancer. Pediatric Blood
& Cancer, 51, 410–415. doi:10.1002/pbc.21616
Schulz, K. F., Altman, D. G., & Moher, D., for the CONSORT Group.
(2010). CONSORT 2010 Statement: Updated guidelines for reportingparallel group randomised trials. British Medical Journal, 340, 698–702.
*Schwartz, C. E., Feinberg, R. G., Jilinskaia, E., & Applegate, J. C. (1999).
An evaluation of a psychosocial intervention for survivors of childhood
cancer: Paradoxical effects of response shift over time. Psycho-
Oncology, 8, 344–354. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1099-1611(199907/08)8:
4/H11021344::AID-PON399 /H110223.0.CO;2-T
Seitz, D. C. M., Besier, T., & Goldbeck, L. (2009). Psychosocial interven-
tions for adolescent cancer patients: A systematic review of the litera-ture. Psycho-Oncology, 18, 683–690. doi:10.1002/pon.1473
Stein, R. E. K., Bauman, L. J., Westbrook, L. E., Coupey, S. M., & Ireys,
H. T. (1993). Framework for identifying children who have chronicconditions: The case for a new definition. The Journal of Pediatrics,
122, 342–347. doi:10.1016/S0022-3476(05)83414-6
Stein, R. E. K., & Jessop, D. J. (1989). What diagnosis does not tell: The
case for a noncategorical approach to chronic illness in childhood. Social
Science & Medicine, 29, 769–778. doi:10.1016/0277-9536(89)90157-3
*Stinson, J. N., McGrath, P. J., Hodnett, E. D., Feldman, B. M., Duffy,
C. M., Huber, A. M., . . . White, M. E. (2010). An Internet-basedself-management program with telephone support for adolescents witharthritis: A pilot randomized controlled trial. The Journal of Rheuma-
tology, 37, 1944–1952. doi:10.3899/jrheum.091327
Suris, J-C., Akre, C., Berchtold, A., Belanger, R. E., & Michaud, P.-A.
(2010). Chronically connected? Internet use among adolescents withchronic conditions. Journal of Adolescent Health, 46, 200–202. doi:
10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.07.008
Taylor, R. M., Gibson, F., & Franck, L. S. (2008). The experience of living
with a chronic illness during adolescence: A critical review of theliterature. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17, 3083–3091. doi:10.1111/
j.1365-2702.2008.02629.x
Thalheimer, W., & Cook, S. (2002). How to calculate effect sizes from
published research articles: A simplified methodology. Retrieved fromhttp://work-learning.com/effect_sizes.htm
Thompson, R. J., Armstrong, F. D., Link, C. L., Pegelow, C. H., Moser, F.,
& Wang, W. C. (2003). A prospective study of the relationship over timeof behavior problems, intellectual functioning, and family functioning inchildren with Sickle Cell Disease: A report from the cooperative studyof Sickle Cell Disease. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 28, 59–65.
doi:10.1093/jpepsy/28.1.59
Treadgold, C. L., & Kuperberg, A. (2010). Been there, done that, wrote the
blog: The choices and challenges of supporting adolescents and youngadults with cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology, 28, 4842–4849. doi:
10.1200/JCO.2009.23.0516
Van Dongen-Melman, J. E., De Groot, A., Hahlen, K., & Verhulst, F. C.
(1996). Commentary: Potential pitfalls of using illness-specific mea-sures. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 21, 103–106. doi:10.1093/
jpepsy/21.1.103
Varni, J. W., Limbers, C. A., & Burwinkle, T. A. (2007). Impaired
health-related quality of life in children and adolescents with chronicconditions: A comparative analysis of 10 disease clusters and 33 diseasecategories/severities utilizing the PedsQL™ 4.0 Generic Core Scales.Health and Quality of Life Outcomes, 5, 1–15.
Wakefield, C. E., McLoone, J., Goodenough, B., Lenthen, K., Cairns,
D. R., & Cohn, R. J. (2010). The psychosocial impact of completingchildhood cancer treatment: A systematic review of the literature. Jour-
nal of Pediatric Psychology, 35, 262–274. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsp056
Wakefield, C. E., McLoone, J., Sansom-Daly, U. M., Fleming, C., Lenthen,
K., Butow, P., . . . Cohn, R. J. (2010). Decision-making during and after
cancer treatment: A qualitative study of adolescent and family experi-ences. Paper presented at the Australian New Zealand Children’s
Haematology and Oncology Group (ANZCHOG) Annual ScientificMeeting.
*Wang, Y-C. A., Stewart, S., Tuli, E., & White, P. (2008). Improved
glycemic control in adolescents with type 1 diabetes mellitus who attenddiabetes camp. Pediatric Diabetes, 9, 29–34. doi:10.1111/j.1399-
5448.2007.00285.x
Whiting, P., Bagnall, A. M., Sowden, A. J., Cornell, J. E., Mulrow, C. D.,
& Ramı ´rez, G. (2001). Interventions for the treatment and management
of chronic fatigue syndrome: A systematic review. Journal of American
Medical Association, 286, 1360–1368. doi:10.1001/jama.286.11.1360
*Whittemore, R., Grey, M., Lindemann, E., Ambrosino, J., & Jaser, S.
(2010). Development of an Internet coping skills training program forteenagers with Type 1 diabetes. CIN: Computers, Informatics, Nursing,
28,103–111.
World Health Organization. (1977). Health needs of adolescents. Geneva,
Switzerland: World Health Organization.392 SANSOM-DALY, PEATE, WAKEFIELD, BRYANT, AND COHN
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
*Wysocki, T., Greco, P., Harris, M. A., Bubb, J., & White, N. H. (2001).
Behavior therapy for families of adolescents with diabetes: Maintenanceof treatment effects. Diabetes Care, 24, 441–446. doi:10.2337/
diacare.24.3.441
*Wysocki, T., Harris, M. A., Buckloh, L. M., Mertlich, D., Sobel Lochrie,
A., Taylor, A., . . . White, N. H. (2006). Effects of behavioral familysystems therapy for diabetes on adolescents’ family relationships, treat-ment adherence, and metabolic control. Journal of Pediatric Psychology,
31,928–938. doi:10.1093/jpepsy/jsj098
Yeo, M., & Sawyer, S. (2005). Chronic illness and disability. British
Medical Journal, 330, 721–723. doi:10.1136/bmj.330.7493.721Zebrack, B., Chesler, M., & Kaplan, S. (2010). To foster healing among
adolescents and young adults with cancer: What helps? What hurts? Sup-
portive Care in Cancer, 18, 131–135. doi:10.1007/s00520-009-0719-y
Received January 19, 2011
Revision received August 15, 2011
Accepted August 15, 2011 /H18546393 INTERVENTIONS FOR AYAS LIVING WITH CHRONIC ILLNESS
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.  
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
