Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=gpsh20
Psychology and Health
ISSN: 0887-0446 (Print) 1476-8321 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/gpsh20
Decoding health education interventions: The
times are a-changin ’
Herman Schaalma & Gerjo Kok
To cite this article:  Herman Schaalma & Gerjo Kok (2009) Decoding health education
interventions: The times are a-changin ’, Psychology and Health, 24:1, 5-9, DOI:
10.1080/08870440801995802
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/08870440801995802
Published online: 19 Feb 2009.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 837
View related articles 
Citing articles: 7 View citing articles 

Psychology and Health
Vol. 24, No. 1, January 2009, 5–9
Decoding health education interventions: The times are a-changin’
Herman Schaalma *and Gerjo Kok
Work and Social Psychology, Maastricht University, 6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands
(Received 29 January 2008; final version received 6 March 2008 )
The development of theory- and evidence-based health education interventions is
a complex process in which interventionists in collaboration with priority groups
and stakeholders make many decisions about objectives, change techniques,
intervention materials and activities, delivery modes and implementation issues.In this development process, interventionists have to find a balance betweenemploying change techniques that should be effective in an ideal world, and
intervention activities and materials that match the reality of priority populations
and intervention contexts. Intervention descriptions providing information aboutwhat behaviour change techniques have been employed, do not reflect thecomplexity of this decision-making process. They do not reveal why interven-
tionists have decided to include or exclude particular behaviour change
techniques. They do not reveal that interventions are based not only uponconsiderations of health psychologists and other scientists, but also on practical
and political boundaries and opportunities that set the scene for the effectiveness
of change techniques. Intervention descriptions should therefore reveal not onlywhat is included in the interventions, but also why the intervention is as it is.Intervention Mapping provides the tools that enable the production of such
descriptions.
Keywords: Intervention Mapping; health behaviour change; intervention content;
change techniques
Introduction
One of the things most of us usually do when we have to develop a health education
intervention for a particular health problem, priority population or intervention context,
is to have a look at what others have done in similar situations. Frequently, however, our
consideration of existing interventions will turn into disillusion. The scientific literaturehardly ever includes intervention descriptions that provide interventionists with clearideas about what interventions and specific behaviour change techniques might be usefulto them (Bartholomew, Parcel, Kok, & Gottlieb, 2006). Although this was already noticedover 20 years ago (Mullen, Green, & Persinger, 1985), the scientific literature still providesprecise descriptions of howwe evaluate interventions, but hardly ever of what we evaluate
(e.g. Dombrovski, Sniehotta, Avenell, & Coyne, 2007; Michie & Abraham, 2004). This is
helpful neither for health education as a science nor for health education practice. Without
a clear understanding of the working mechanisms of interventions ‘ ...the application
*Corresponding author. Email: herman.schaalma@psychology.unimaas.nl
ISSN 0887–0446 print/ISSN 1476–8321 online
/C2232009 Taylor & Francis
DOI: 10.1080/08870440801995802http://www.informaworld.com
of behaviour change technologies is likely to be slow, with ‘‘wheels’’ being re-invented
rather than re-applied’ (Michie & Abraham, 2004, p. 30).
In line with, and in addition to, recommendations for the reporting of interventions in
behavioural medicine (Davidson et al., 2003), Michie and Abraham (2004) make a plea for
intervention reports that provide descriptions of the behaviour change techniquesemployed in such detail that they allow exact replication, preferably using a standardisedtaxonomy of change techniques. They further suggest that such descriptions should be
a precondition for publication of effectiveness trials, and, for instance, are made available
through the internet. Although we embrace these valuable recommendations, andalthough we acknowledge that it would be a major step forward if they were implemented,we think that they do not go far enough.
Intervention development
The development of theory- and evidence-based health education interventions is a complex
process in which interventionists in collaboration with priority groups and stakeholders
make many decisions about objectives, change techniques, intervention materials andactivities, delivery modes and implementation issues (Bartholomew et al., 2006). In thisdevelopment process, interventionists have to find a balance between employing change
techniques that should be effective in an ideal world, and intervention activities and
materials that match the reality of priority populations and intervention contexts; they haveto find a balance between what they prefer to do, and what is feasible to do.
Intervention descriptions, providing information about what behaviour change
techniques have been employed, do not reflect the complexity of this decision-making
process. They do not reveal why interventionists have decided to include or exclude
particular behaviour change techniques. They do not reveal that interventions are basednot only upon considerations of health psychologists and other scientists, but also on
political and practical considerations that relate to efficiency, feasibility and ethics
(cf. Leurs et al., 2007). Since these practical and political boundaries and opportunities setthe scene for the effectiveness of behaviour change techniques, intervention descriptions
should move beyond specific information about the intervention content, target
populations, modes of delivery, intervention context and intervention implementers(Davidson et al., 2003), whether based upon a standardised taxonomy of behaviourchange techniques or not (Abraham & Michie, 2008; Michie & Abraham, 2004).
Interventionists in search for guidelines for their future interventions would need
intervention descriptions that provide them with information about when andhowtheory
was used in the decision-making about intervention design, and about when and how
intervention design decisions were affected by, for instance, practical and political
considerations regarding widespread and sustained intervention implementation
(Bartholomew et al., 2006). Descriptions should therefore reveal not only what is
included in the interventions, but also why the intervention is as it is. In our view,
Intervention Mapping (Bartholomew et al., 2006) provides the tools that enable the
production of such descriptions.
Intervention Mapping
Intervention Mapping (IM) was developed as a planning framework for the development
of theory- and evidence-based health promotion programmes (Bartholomew, Parcel, &6 H. Schaalma and G. Kok
Kok, 1998). IM provides guidelines and tools for the empirical and theoretical foundation
of health promotion programmes, for the application of theory, for the translation of
theory into actual intervention activities and materials, for the management of programme
adoption and implementation, and for the collaboration between health educators,researchers, priority groups and stakeholders. IM enables health promoters to developinterventions that include theory-based intervention strategies and materials that may
accomplish programme objectives, and that match priority populations and intervention
contexts. IM guarantees that health promoters anticipate a widespread and sustainedprogramme implementation, and collaborate with priority groups and stakeholders.
As such, IM. ...‘serves as a way to map the path of intervention development from
recognizing a need or problem to testing solutions’ (Bartholomew et al., 2006, p. xvii).
IM describes the intervention development process in six phases: (1) assessing
needs and capacities, (2) specifying programme objectives, (3) selecting theory-basedintervention methods and practical intervention strategies, (4) designing and organizing ofthe programme, (5) specifying adoption and implementation plans and (6) generating
an evaluation plan. In daily language: (1) What is the problem? Causes? Risk groups?
What are the resources for change? (2) What do we wish to change, and why? (3) How canwe accomplish these changes? (4) ...in such a way that it makes sense and will be
implemented? (5) How can we facilitate sustained implementation? and (6) Did it work
out the way we planned?
IM reflects the collaborative, iterative and cumulative decision-making processes
underlying the development of theory- and evidence-based health promotion(Bartholomew et al., 2006). In collaboration with priority groups and stakeholders,
interventionists move back and forth between intervention development phases, but,
finally, the decision-making in each phase is based on the decisions that were made inprevious phases, and neglect of a particular phase may lead to mistakes and inadequatedecisions in subsequent phases.
To facilitate and document the complex decision-making process in each of these
phases, IM provides guidelines and tools in the format of procedures, work sheets,
matrices and tables. IM requires interventionists to specify intervention change objectives
that target the psychosocial correlates of the preparatory behaviours (e.g. buyingcondoms, taking them along and negotiating their use) that are linked to a particular
health promoting behaviour (e.g. condom use). IM also asks interventionists to document
the identification of behaviour change techniques that may be useful in achieving thesechange objectives, including their deliberations regarding the conditions under which thesetechniques are potentially effective (Kok, Schaalma, Brug, Ruiter, & Van Empelen, 2004).
For instance, interventionists should describe why they decided to use a norm-setting
approach rather than a risk-communication approach to motivate homosexual men toengage in HIV-testing: i.e. concern that a HIV-positive test result may trigger defensiverisk denial (Mikolajczak, Kok, & Hospers, 2008). IM also asks interventionists to describe
how they operationalized potentially useful behaviour change techniques (e.g. peer
modelling) into intervention activities and materials (e.g. videotaped modelling) in such away that these materials and activities match priority groups (e.g. youth), intervention
contexts (e.g. schools) and the conditions for effectiveness (i.e. the priority population
can identify with the model, the model demonstrates feasible sub-skills and receivespositive reinforcement, and the priority population perceives a coping model rather thana mastery model; see Kok et al., 2004). Finally, the use of IM in intervention design
leads to intervention descriptions that specify and underpin the relations betweenPsychology and Health 7
intervention change objectives, behaviour change techniques, and intervention activities
and materials.
Such documentation provides a means to communicate the intervention content, its
rationale, and the underlying decision-making processes to everyone involved in the
development process (Bartholomew et al., 2006). In a similar vein, it provides a means tocommunicate the intervention design process to other interventionists and researchers inthe fields of health psychology, health education and health promotion.
Conclusion
We embrace the suggestion by Abraham and Michie (2008, p. 11) that ‘standardized
intervention manuals should be prepared for all published intervention evaluations so thatresearchers and practitioners can discover how techniques constituting the content designof interventions were operationalized in practice’. In our view, however, intervention
descriptions should not only document what behaviour change techniques have been
included in interventions and how these techniques have been transferred to materials andactivities. Intervention descriptions should also demystify the decision-making processunderlying the selection of change techniques and the reasons why particular activities and
materials were preferred to others. We think that IM is a relevant and useful, and perhaps
sufficient step towards such descriptions.
To date full descriptions of the development process of theory- and evidence-based
health education interventions are rarely included in the scientific literature (see for someexceptions, e.g. Kok, Harterink, Vriens, De Zwart, & Hospers, 2006; Mikolajczak et al.,
2008; Tortolero, et al., 2005; Van Empelen, Kok, Schaalma, & Bartholomew, 2003;
Van Kesteren, Kok, Hospers, Schippers, & De Wildt, 2006). We hope these times soonwill be changing.
References
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (in press). A taxonomy of behavior change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychology .
Bartholomew, L.K., Parcel, G.S., & Kok, G. (1998). Intervention Mapping: A process for
developing theory and evidence-based health education programs. Health Education & Behavior,
25, 545–563.
Bartholomew, L.K., Parcel, G.S., Kok, G., & Gottlieb, N. (2006). Planning health promotion
programs: An Intervention Mapping approach . San Francisco, C.A.: Jossey-Bass.
Davidson, K.W., Goldstein, M., Kaplan, R.M., Kaufmann, P.G., Knatterund, G.L.,
Orleans, C.T., et al. (2003). Evidence-based behavioural medicine: What is it andhow do we achieve it? Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 26 , 161–171.
Dombrovski, S.U., Sniehotta, F.F., Avenell, A., & Coyne, J.C. (2007). Towards a cumulative science
of behaviour change: Do current conduct and reporting of behavioural interventions fall shortof best practice? Psychology & Health, 22 , 869–874.
Kok, G., Harterink, P., Vriens, P., De Zwart, O., & Hospers, H.J. (2006). The gay cruise: Developing
a theory- and evidence-based internet HIV-prevention intervention. Sexuality Research & Social
Policy: Journal of NSRC, 3 , 52–67.
Kok, G., Schaalma, H., Ruiter, R.A.C., Brug, J., & Van Empelen, P. (2004). Intervention mapping:
A protocol for applying health psychology theory to prevention programmes. Journal of Health
Psychology, 9 , 85–98.8 H. Schaalma and G. Kok
Leurs, M.T.W., Schaalma, H.P., Jansen, M.W.J., Mur-Veeman, I.M., Van Breukelen, G., &
De Vries, N.K. (2007). Comprehensive quality assessment of healthy school interventions.Preventive Medicine, 45 , 366–372.
Michie, S., & Abraham, C. (2004). Interventions to change health behaviors: Evidence-based of
evidence-inspired? Psychology & Health, 19 , 29–49.
Mikolajczak, J., Kok, G., & Hospers, H.J. (in press). Queermasters: Developing a theory- and
evidence- based internet HIV-prevention intervention to promote HIV-testing among men
who have sex with men (MSM). Journal of Applied Psychology .
Mullen, P.D., Green, L.W., & Persinger, G.S. (1985). Clinical trials of patient education for
chronic conditions: A comparative meta-analysis of intervention types. Preventive Medicine,
14, 753–781.
Tortolero, S.R., Markham, C.M., Parcel, G.S., Peters Jr., R.J., Escobar-Chaves, S.L.,
Basen-Engquist, K., et al. (2005). Using Intervention Mapping to adapt an effective HIV,
sexually transmitted disease, and pregnancy prevention program for high-risk minority youth.
Health Promotion Practice, 6 , 286–298.
Van Empelen, P., Kok, G., Schaalma, H., & Bartholomew, K. (2003). An AIDS risk reduction
program for Dutch drug users: An intervention mapping approach to planning. Health
Promotion Practice, 4 , 402–412.
Van Kesteren, N., Kok, G., Hospers, H.J., Schippers, J., & De Wildt, W. (2006). Systematic
development of a self-help and motivational enhancement intervention to promote sexual
health in HIV-positive men who have sex with men. Aids Patient Care & STDs, 20 , 858–875.Psychology and Health 9
