Teaching Children to Cross Streets Safely: A Randomized
Controlled Trial
David C. Schwebel1, Leslie A. McClure2, and Joan Severson3
1Department of Psychology, University of Alabama at Birmingham
2Department of Biostatistics, University of Alabama at Birmingham
3Digital Artefacts, LLC, Iowa City, IA
Abstract
Objective— Child pedestrian injury is a global public health challenge. This randomized
controlled trial considered comparative efficacy of individualized streetside training, training in a
virtual pedestrian environment, training using videos and websites, plus no-training control, to
improve children’s street-crossing ability.
Methods— Pedestrian safety was evaluated among 231 seven- and eight-year-olds using both
streetside (field) and laboratory-based (virtual environment) trials prior to intervention group
assignment, immediately post-training, and six months post-training. All training groups received
six 30-minute sessions. Four outcomes assessed pedestrian safety: start delay (temporal lag before
initiating crossing), hits/close calls (collisions/near-misses with vehicles in simulated crossings),
attention to traffic (looks left and right, controlled for time), and missed opportunities (safe
crossing opportunities that were missed).
Results— Results showed training in the virtual pedestrian environment and especially
individualized streetside training resulted in safer pedestrian behavior post-intervention and at
follow-up. As examples, children trained streetside entered safe traffic gaps more quickly post-
training than control group children and children trained streetside or in the virtual environment
had somewhat fewer hits/close calls in post-intervention VR trials. Children showed minimal
change in attention to traffic post-training. Children trained with videos/websites showed minimal
learning.
Conclusion— Both individualized streetside training and training within virtual pedestrian
environments may improve 7- and 8-year-olds’ street-crossing safety. Individualized training has
limitations of adult time and labor. Virtual environment training has limitations of accessibility
and cost. Given the public health burden of child pedestrian injuries, future research should
explore innovative strategies for effective training that can be broadly disseminated.
Keywords
pedestrian; street-crossing; injury; safety; randomized controlled trial
Corresponding Author: David C. Schwebel, Department of Psychology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 1300 University Blvd,
CH 415, Birmingham AL 35294 USA, Phone: (205) 934-8745, Fax: (205) 975-6110, schwebel@uab.edu.
NIH Public Access
Author Manuscript
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
Published in final edited form as:
Health Psychol . 2014 July ; 33(7): 628–638. doi:10.1037/hea0000032.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Child pedestrian injury is a global public health challenge. In the United States, 459 children
died from pedestrian injuries in 2010 and another 215,188 were treated in emergency
departments following pedestrian injuries (National Center for Injury Prevention and
Control [NCIPC], 2013). Global data are less precise, but alarming. Estimates exceed 30,000
child pedestrians killed annually worldwide (Toroyan & Peden, 2007).
Among the target age group for this research, children ages 7 and 8, there were 37
pedestrian injury deaths and 3,792 pedestrian injuries treated in emergency departments in
2010 (NCIPC, 2013). Several studies document that young children regularly negotiate
street environments alone, especially when going to and from school (Macpherson, Roberts,
& Pless, 1998; Martin, Lee, & Lowry, 2007; McDonald, Brown, Marchett, & Pedroso,
2011). In middle childhood (ages 5–9), about 60% of pedestrian injuries and mortalities
occur when the child is crossing a road at or between intersections (Agran, Winn, &
Anderson, 1994; DiMaggio & Durkin, 2002; Lightstone, Dhillon, Peek-Asa, & Kraus, 2001)
– with mid-block crossings particularly dangerous near schools (Warsh, Rothman, Slater,
Steverango, & Howard, 2009) – and typically within a half-mile of the child’s home
(Lightstone et al., 2001) or school (Warsh et al., 2009).
A wide range of behavioral and environmental factors contribute to child injury risk.
Prominent among them is children’s development. Engaging in street environments safely is
a complex intrapsychic task that requires accurate perception of the street environment and
the vehicles traveling in it, efficient cognitive processing of that environment to make a
decision about the safety of continuously appearing and changing traffic gaps, and initiation
and maintenance of motoric movement to traverse the street. Because children are actively
learning and developing the perceptual, cognitive, and motoric skills to be safe pedestrians
during middle childhood (e.g., Barton, 2006; Schieber & Thompson, 1996; Whitebread &
Neilson, 2000), they have higher risk of pedestrian injuries.
A range of programs have been developed and tested to teach children the skills needed for
safe pedestrian behavior (see Duperrex, Bunn, & Roberts, 2002; Schwebel, Davis, &
O’Neal, 2012 for reviews). Available interventions have varying efficacy, but the existing
literature consistently demonstrates that most children have the developmental capacity to
learn safe pedestrian behavior with appropriate practice and training by age 7 or 8, and
perhaps earlier. Studies of individualized or small-group training by a skilled adult
pedestrian at streetside locations, for example, yield improved pedestrian behavior that is
retained over time (Barton, Schwebel, & Morrongiello, 2007; Demetre et al., 1993;
Rothengatter, 1984; van Schagen, 1988). Early studies of training in non-immersive virtual
pedestrian environments indicate promise that training in virtual environments may also be
effective at improving pedestrian behavior (Bart, Katz, Weiss, & Josman, 2008; McComas,
MacKay, & Pivik, 2002; Thomson et al., 2005). Studies investigating other training tools,
including classroom-style education (Berry & Romo, 2006; Cross et al., 2000; Hotz et al.,
2004, 2009; Stevenson, Iredell, Howat, Cross, & Hall, 1999), videos (Preusser & Lund ,
1988; Zeedyk & Wallace, 2003), and computer software (Glang, Noell, Ary, & Schwarz,
2005; Tolmie et al., 2005), offer mixed results, with many reporting increased knowledge
about children exposed to the training but several reporting poor transfer to safer behavior
patterns.Schwebel et al. Page 2
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
What remains untested in large randomized trials is which interventions might teach
children necessary components of safe pedestrian behavior most effectively, and whether
different interventions may be more effective at teaching different components of pedestrian
safety. Identification of pedestrian training programs that are efficacious could play a
significant role in intervention dissemination to reduce child pedestrian injury rates
nationally and globally.
The present study considered three strategies of pedestrian safety training in a randomized
controlled trial with seven- and eight-year-old children. Participating children were
randomly assigned to one of four conditions. One group of children received training using
widely available video and internet programs on pedestrian safety. These programs represent
the most commonly used strategy for child pedestrian safety training in the United States,
and have been demonstrated previously to have good efficacy to transfer knowledge to
children but limited efficacy to create behavior change (Glang et al., 2005; Preusser & Lund,
1988; Tolmie et al., 2005; Zeedyk & Wallace, 2003). A second group of children received
individualized training at streetside locations with an adult researcher. Individualized
streetside training has been shown in initial trials to be an effective strategy to train children
in safe pedestrian behavior (Barton et al., 2007; Demetre et al., 1993; van Schagen, 1988;
Yeaton & Bailey, 1983). A third group of children received individualized training in a
semi-immersive, interactive virtual pedestrian environment. Training was tailored to the
child’s ability and consisted of repeated crossings in the virtual environment with feedback
concerning safety of those crossings. Early work with non-immersive virtual environments
suggests children might learn pedestrian safety via such strategies (Bart et al., 2008;
McComas et al., 2002; Thomson et al., 2005), but largescale randomized trials have not yet
been published. The fourth and final group of children was randomly assigned to be in a
control group and received no pedestrian safety training as part of the research program. Our
focus was on mid-block crossing on two-lane bi-directional roads, without traffic signals.
All participating children completed both field and laboratory-based assessments of
pedestrian behavior prior to the intervention, immediately following the intervention, and six
months after the intervention was completed. Based on the existing literature, we
hypothesized that children trained at streetside locations and those trained in the VR would
show superior improvement in pedestrian safety skills compared to those trained using
videos and internet programs or the control group. We expected this result to be true both for
broad pedestrian skills (hits/close calls in simulated crossings) as well as for specific key
components of pedestrian safety (attention to traffic, delay entering safe traffic gaps) and for
crossing efficiency (crossing when safe opportunities arise).
Methods
Participants
Two hundred and forty 7- and 8-year-old children were recruited from community sources
in the Birmingham, Alabama area, and 231 were randomly assigned to condition (see Figure
1 for CONSORT flowchart of participation). Nine children were dropped during baseline
visits, prior to randomization, for one of three reasons: discovered to be ineligible based onSchwebel et al. Page 3
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
age after consenting and enrollment (n=3), unable to understand and follow the study
protocol (n=3), or failure to complete the baseline assessment (n=3).
The randomized sample of 231 children was 43% male and had an average age of 8.0 years
(SD = 0.7). It was racially diverse, with 52% of parents identifying their children as White,
42% as African American, and 7% as other races/ethnicities, or as bi-racial or multi-racial.
All participants’ parents provided written informed consent, and children provided informed
assent. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of
Alabama at Birmingham.
The Virtual Reality Pedestrian Environment
The virtual reality (VR) pedestrian environment used in this study, including hardware and
software specifications, is detailed elsewhere (Schwebel, Gaines, & Severson, 2008).
Briefly, the simulated environment replicates an actual crosswalk near a local school. The
crosswalk is mid-block and crosses a two-lane bi-directional road. Children are semi-
immersed atop a wooden curb with three monitors in front of them. They view traffic
moving bi-directionally and are instructed to step down when they deem it safe to cross.
Upon stepping, children trigger the system to initiate a race- and gender-matched avatar to
cross the simulated street, such that the environment switches from first person to third
person and allows children to learn whether their crossing was safe or not. The avatar walks
at the child’s typical walking speed (as assessed previously in a different room across five
trials).
The virtual environment includes ambient and traffic noise and has been validated in a trial
demonstrating behavior in the virtual world matched behavior in the actual street
environment, both among children and adults (Schwebel et al., 2008). A short video
demonstrating the virtual environment is available at http://www.uab.edu/psychology/psy-
fac/33-primary-faculty/66-dr-david-c-schwebel
General Protocol
Following consent processes, children completed 12 (if randomly assigned to an
intervention group) or 6 (if randomly assigned to the control group) sessions: a pre-
intervention laboratory session, a pre-intervention field session, 6 training sessions (omitted
for control group), a post-test laboratory session, a post-test field session, a 6-month follow-
up laboratory session, and a 6-month follow-up field session. During the pre-test sessions,
baseline measures of pedestrian safety were collected in both virtual and real (field)
environments (details below). Following pre-test assessment, children were randomly
assigned to one of four groups: the virtual reality training group, the video/computer training
group, the streetside training group, or the no-contact control group. Training in all three
intervention groups was comprised of six sessions, scheduled bi-weekly over 3 weeks. Soon
after intervention sessions were completed, post-training pedestrian safety measures were
collected during two visits, one in the laboratory and one in the field. Finally, two follow-up
sessions assessed pedestrian behavior in the laboratory and field six months after completion
of the intervention. Protocols for each session appear below.Schwebel et al. Page 4
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pre-Training Assessment
Two sessions, one in the laboratory and the other in the field, assessed pre-training baseline
measures of children’s pedestrian abilities. The laboratory visit was comprised of 30
crossings within the virtual reality environment, 10 at each of three “difficulty” levels: 25
MPH traffic and light volume (8 vehicles/minute); 30 MPH traffic and moderate volume (12
vehicles/minute); 35 MPH traffic and heavy volume (16 vehicles/minute), in a randomized
order. Prior to virtual reality assessment trials, children completed 8 practice trials and
received standardized instructions to cross when they perceived the virtual street
environment to be safe.
The second pre-training session occurred in the field in front of a crosswalk on a two-lane
bi-directional road, but not the same location as that in the VR simulation. Children
completed 8 crossings using the “shout” technique, whereby they stood immediately
adjacent to the road and shouted “now” when they deemed it safe to cross (Demetre et al.,
1992). Children also completed 8 crossings using the “two-step” technique, whereby they
stood two steps off the curb, and took two steps toward the road to indicate when they
deemed it safe to cross (Demetre et al., 1992). Measures of pedestrian behavior derived from
the streetside and virtual road simulations appear below under the header, “Pedestrian
Measures”.
Virtual Reality Training
Children in the virtual reality training group received six sessions of training in the VR
environment, each comprised of three segments of 15 virtual crossings (45 total crossings
per session). Each crossing was accompanied by computer-generated feedback concerning
safety; this feedback was delivered by a child-friendly cartoon character who cautioned
greater safety in the case of a hit or close call, and who provided positive verbal feedback in
the case of a safe crossing. Difficulty of crossing, defined by both traffic density and speed
of traffic, was tailored to children’s abilities, with the goal that children succeed on about
85% of trials and traffic became increasingly difficult as success rates improved.
Video/Internet Training
Children in the video/computer training group were exposed to six sessions with some of the
most widely-used pedestrian training tools in the United States. The tools were chosen based
on their broad use (e.g., recommended by state Departments of Transportation), broad
accessibility (accessible to broad population), and relevance (focused primarily on child
pedestrian safety). Each session lasted about 30 minutes. Materials presented, by trial, were:
Training Trial 1: WalkSmart computer software (Oregon Center for Applied Research)
Training Trial 2: I’m no Fool video (Disney) and Willie the Whistle video (National
Safety Council/National Highway Traffic Safety Association, US Department of
Transportation)
Training Trial 3: Safer Journey website (Federal Highway Association, US Department
of Transportation)Schwebel et al. Page 5
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Training Trial 4: Step to Safety with Asimo video (National Safety Council/Honda
Motor Company) and Otto the Auto School Bus Safety video (AAA Foundation for
Traffic Safety)
Training Trial 5: Otto the Auto computer software (California State Automobile
Association, American Automobile Association)
Training Trial 6: Otto the Auto videos on Pedestrian Safety and Being Seen in Traffic
(AAA Foundation for Traffic Safety)
Streetside Training
Children in the streetside behavioral training group were exposed to six sessions of
individualized streetside training from trained research assistants. During all sessions, the
child and adult stood adjacent to each other and to the street. The training program was
grounded in behavioral theory (e.g., modeling, reinforcing, chaining) and developed from
strategies used by Rothengatter (1984), Young and Lee (1987), and Barton and colleagues
(Barton et al., 2007). A semi-structured and flexible approach educated children based on
each child’s strengths, limitations, and abilities (as judged by the trainer during training
sessions), with two primary foci: attending to traffic in both directions and selecting safe
traffic gaps. Streetside locations were selected at marked crosswalks that became
increasingly more challenging (heavier traffic) across the six sessions; all were two-lane bi-
directional roads with mid-block unsignaled crosswalks.
Post-Training and Follow-up Assessments
The post-training and follow-up assessments paralleled the pre-training assessment. At both
time points, two sessions were conducted, the first in the laboratory (30 crossings in the
virtual environment, 10 each at different difficulty levels) and the second in the field (16
crossings, 8 each using the shout and two-step techniques). The post-training assessments
began approximately a week after the last training session for children in intervention groups
(M=6.8 days, SD = 6.2), and approximately five weeks after the pre-intervention assessment
ended for children in the control group (M=36.2 days, SD = 12.4). Thus, the same amount of
time (about 5 weeks) passed between pre-training and post-training across all groups,
including the control group, allowing for control of any developmental effects of time
passage. The follow-up assessment occurred approximately six months following
completion of the post-intervention assessment (M=182.5 days, SD = 11.9).
Pedestrian Measures
Pedestrian safety outcomes were collected in two locations, the VR and the field. Each
offered pros and cons. The VR offered a controlled traffic scenario whereby we could
standardize speed and volume of traffic across participants; remove potential bias from
weather, time of day, and other environmental characteristics; and obtain precise computer-
driven measurement of behavior. The field assessment offered a more realistic and
ecologically valid measure of behavior with real-world traffic (and the emotions that go
along with it). Four outcome measures of pedestrian safety were considered: hits/close calls,
attention to traffic, start delay, and missed opportunities (See Table 1).Schwebel et al. Page 6
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Hits/close calls were included as a gross outcome measure of pedestrian safety, a count of
crossings that are highly risky – the child would either have been hit by a vehicle had it been
an actual rather than a simulated crossing, or would have been within 1 second of being hit
by a vehicle. The virtual environment records hits and close calls automatically, with close
calls tallied any time the child was within one second of collision with an oncoming vehicle.
Children crossed the virtual street 30 times, so results are expressed as a count of hits/close
calls out of 30 trials in the VR. Hits/close calls were assessed in the field by videotape
review. A hit/close call was recorded when the time between the child’s initiation into the
crosswalk plus their average walking speed (assessed during the pre-intervention laboratory
trial) over the crosswalk distance in the field was less than one second shorter than the time
until the next vehicle entered the crosswalk. Inter-rater reliability for the timing was
established and adequate ( r > .95 between independent coders measuring time, masked to
condition, on 20% of sample). Children completed 16 trials in the field, and results are
expressed as a count out of 16 trials.
Attention to traffic and start delay were included as two critical components of pedestrian
safety. Attention to traffic was measured by looks to the left plus looks to the right while
waiting to cross the street, divided by waiting time in minutes, and offers an indication of
the pedestrian’s attention to the traffic environment. Each head turn in either direction was
counted as one turn, such that a look to the left, the right, and the left again would be
counted as 3 turns. A single look to the left was counted as one turn. Head-tracking
equipment monitored children’s visual attention to traffic from the left and right in the
virtual world. Field trial data was coded from videotape. Coders counted head-turns to the
left and to the right, and also timed waiting time. Interrater reliability was again adequate ( r
> .95 between independent coders measuring times and counts, masked to condition, on
20% of sample).
Start delay, defined as the temporal lag (in seconds) before initiation of crossing into a
traffic gap, is considered an indicator of children’s efficiency of cognitive processing in
pedestrian situations (Barton, 2006; Plumert, Kearney, & Cremer, 2004). Adult cognition
while crossing streets is highly honed, and many adults actually anticipate a safe crossing by
entering the near lane of traffic before a vehicle passes the far lane. Young children rarely do
this. Instead, inexperienced child pedestrians apparently do not begin to process the safety of
a traffic gap until that gap appears, causing a significant (e.g., 500-2000 milliseconds)
temporal delay before children enter a safe gap. That delay increases injury risk.
Start delays were assessed automatically in the VR, defined as the temporal gap between the
gap crossed within appearing (that is, the last vehicle passes the crosswalk) and the child
initiating crossing by stepping off the curb. Start delays were assessed in field trials via
coding of videotaped behavior. Coders watched tapes and used a computer-based stopwatch
to record the time between the last vehicle leaving the crosswalk and the child perceiving a
safe crossing opportunity by indicating with a shout “now” (shout task) or the first foot
landing on the ground (two-step task). Inter-rater reliability was established for the coding
and was adequate ( r > .95 between independent coders measuring times, masked to
condition on 20% of sample).Schwebel et al. Page 7
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Missed opportunities do not represent a measure of pedestrian safety but rather a measure of
the pedestrian’s efficiency in pedestrian behavior. Tallied as instances when a traffic gap
that was 1.5 or greater times the time needed for the child to cross the street, but the child
chose not to cross, a high number of missed opportunities reflects inefficiency in pedestrian
behavior. These instances were counted electronically in the VR and by videotape review in
the field. There was very low variance of missed opportunities in the field, so the field
assessment was dropped from analysis due to poor variance. Results from the VR are
expressed as a count out of 30 trials, with multiple missed opportunities possible within a
single crossing trial.
All field pedestrian measures were computed separately for the two-step and the shout tasks.
Because trends for the two-step and shout tasks were similar across intervention groups, we
aggregated behavior across the two assessment strategies to create single field measures of
pedestrian behavior.
Other Measures
Basic demographic information was reported by parents at the initial laboratory visit. A
verbal intelligence screening was conducted using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-IV
(PPVT-4; Dunn & Dunn, 2007). Normed on a large national sample, the PPVT-4 has
excellent internal and test-retest reliability, and converges well with other measures of
verbal intelligence (Dunn & Dunn, 2007; Pullen, Tuckwiller, Konold, Maynard, & Coyne,
2010).
Children’s pedestrian experience was assessed by parent report using the pedestrian
behavior questionnaire (Stavrinos et al., 2009), which assesses children’s typical weekly
walking habits in multiple domains (e.g., to school, to friends’ houses, to walk dog, etc.).
Responses were summed to yield parent-report of the child’s total average weekly distance
walked.
Analysis Plan
Descriptive data were considered first, both for the full sample and within randomly-
assigned groups. We tested for balance across the groups using chi-square tests of
association (categorical variables) and analysis of variance (continuous variables). Primary
hypotheses were tested using repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) with
pedestrian behavior, assessed with four measures in the lab and three measures in the field,
serving as dependent variables and time (pre vs. post vs. follow-up) and condition (VR vs.
streetside vs. video vs. control) as independent variables. We assessed the interaction
between time and condition to determine if the changes in condition over time differed, and
if so, we performed contrasts to determine which pairs of conditions differed over time. Due
to inequality of variances across condition and time for the field measures, as assessed via
the Levene (1960) test, we allowed the variance to vary by condition/time combination in
the repeated measures model and incorporated this into the tests of the interaction. For
models in which the interaction was significant, we used a Bonferroni adjustment to the p-
value for the 12 pairwise comparisons to account for multiple comparisons. Both unadjusted
and adjusted ( p-value multiplied by 12) values are presented.Schwebel et al. Page 8
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Specifically, we fit the following model:
where Yijk is the response (as presented in Table 1) measured on the ith subject (i=1,…, 60)
within the jth condition (j=control, VR, streetside, video) at the kth visit (k=pre, post, follow-
up). In this model formulation, the parameter vector associated with condition has 3 degrees
of freedom (due to 4 levels of the variable), and the parameter associated with visit has 2
degrees of freedom (due to the 3 levels of the variables). Thus, the parameter vector
associated with the interaction has 3x2 degrees of freedom. For each model, we considered
the pre-intervention visit to be the reference visit and the VR condition to be the reference
value. Thus, the pre-intervention visit for the VR group was the reference value for the
interaction. The parameter estimates and their standard errors from the models for each
outcome are presented in Supplemental Table 1. Note that in this table, parameter estimates
presented represent differences from that level to the reference.
We assumed sphericity (compound symmetry) for the covariance structure unless we found
the variance to differ across combinations of visit and condition, in which case we allowed
variance components to be estimated for each visit/condition combination. We assessed
symmetry univariately at each visit/condition combination via ocular inspection, and
encountered one situation for which the data were not approximately symmetric (missed
opportunities in the field). We adjusted the missed opportunities in the field variable by
dichotomizing it (0 vs. 1 or more) and assessed that variable via generalized linear mixed
model prior to dropping it from consideration due to lack of variation across groups even
when dichotomized.
Results
Table 2 presents descriptive data for those children who were randomized, both overall and
by intervention group (n=231). As expected, no groups differed statistically on the baseline
factors. We also compared the 211 children who completed the full study with the 20 who
did not complete all assessments. The non-completers were more likely to be African
American and to come from families with lower socioeconomic status, but otherwise the
two groups were comparable on demographics (age and gender), pedestrian experience, and
randomized group assignment. Given this, subsequent analyses were conducted in a pairwise
manner, with all available data.
Table 3 presents descriptive data and p-values for the interaction between condition and time
for seven repeated-measures ANOVAs. As shown, five of the seven models yielded
statistically significant interactions, indicating that the changes over time differed by
condition.
Results from the field assessments are presented graphically in Figure 2. The four groups
started with similar mean start delays but the streetside group showed a sharp increase in
mean start delay post-intervention whereas the other three groups showed a modest
decrease, with the VR group showing the sharpest decrease post-intervention. By the follow-Schwebel et al. Page 9
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
up assessment, all four groups returned close to baseline. Contrasts comparing the slopes
found that the streetside group changes differed from all three other groups (unadjusted ps
< .0001, adjusted ps < 0.01), suggesting the intervention had influence on the children, and
especially on the group trained streetside which may have become more conscious of the
decision-making process to cross a street and therefore took slightly longer to make the
decision immediately after the training. The children trained in the VR also showed change;
those children may have practiced decisionmaking enough that the process became
streamlined somewhat post-intervention.
All four groups showed a modest increase in close calls during field trials from pre to post
assessment, with the children trained in the video group showing the sharpest, but not
statistically different, increase. Three of the four groups then showed a modest decrease
upon follow-up, perhaps reflecting six months of development; children trained at streetside
locations did not show that decrease as clearly and the contrast was not statistically
significant. Data from the attention to traffic assessment during field trials are also shown in
Figure 2. Results were not statistically significant but indicate a trend for the children trained
in the VR to have less attention to traffic following training, with the other groups staying
consistent or showing a slight increase. During the six months from post-intervention to
follow-up assessments, the control group showed a sharp decrease in attention to traffic
whereas the other three groups maintained similar levels of attention to traffic.
Results from laboratory assessments of pedestrian safety in the VR also appear in Figure 2.
For all four outcomes, changes over time varied across the four groups. Results from the
assessment of start delay are very similar to those of the same measure from the field
assessment. The streetside group showed an increase in start delay immediately post-
intervention, followed by a sharp decrease upon follow-up six months later. The other three
groups showed a steady decline in start delay over time, with the VR group showing the
sharpest decrease post-training. As was found in the field assessment, contrasts comparing
the slopes found that the streetside group changes differed from all three other groups
(unadjusted ps < .0001 and adjusted ps < .01 for all contrasts except video vs. streetside
groups from post to follow-up, for which unadjusted p < .05 and adjusted p = .53.
Results from the assessment of hits and close calls in the VR also show parallels to the field
measurement assessment. Both the streetside and VR-trained groups showed a decrease in
hits/close calls when crossing in the virtual environment post-training; the children trained
with videos and internet websites showed a modest increase, and the control group of
children showed a notable increase in dangerous crossings during the post-training
assessment. The differences between the streetside and control groups and between the VR
and the control groups were statistically significant in unadjusted analyses from pre- to post-
training (unadjusted ps < .05; adjusted p, streetside vs. control = .11, VR vs. control = .31).
All four groups showed a decrease between post-training and follow-up assessments,
perhaps reflecting the six months of development that had occurred.
Results from the assessment of attention to traffic in the VR were quite different from the
assessment in the field. In the virtual environment assessment, the group trained in the VR
demonstrated a sharp increase in attention to traffic immediately following training, and thenSchwebel et al. Page 10
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
a continued increase at follow-up. The children trained with videos/internet and at streetside
locations showed little change immediately following training but a sharp increase at follow-
up. The control group showed modest increases throughout assessments but minimal change
compared to the three groups of children who received training. No contrasts were
significant after applying the Bonferroni adjustment. Unadjusted statistically significant
contrasts included the following for pre- to post-intervention change: VR vs control groups
(unadjusted p < .05; adjusted p = .24), VR vs. streetside training (unadjusted p < .01;
adjusted p = .05); and the following for post-intervention to follow-up assessment: streetside
vs. video groups (unadjusted p < .05; adjusted p = .22).
Finally, we examined instances of missed opportunities in the virtual reality assessments.
Missed opportunity data were skewed with a long positive tail; results examining medians
were very similar to those with means and data from means are presented. Children trained
at streetside locations showed a large increase in missed opportunities following training,
followed by a decrease at follow-up six months later. Children trained in the VR showed the
opposite pattern: a sharp decrease following training, followed by a modest increase at
follow-up. The children trained with videos/internet showed minimal change across time
and the control group of children showed a slight decrease in missed opportunities across the
assessments. Post-hoc contrasts found that the streetside group differed from all three other
groups at a statistically significant level (unadjusted ps < .001 from pre- to post-intervention,
adjusted ps <.05; unadjusted ps < .05 from post-intervention to follow-up, adjusted p,
streetside vs. VR=.04; adjusted p, streetside vs. control = .57; adjusted p streetside vs. video
= .12).
Discussion
Taken together, results indicate that both individualized streetside pedestrian safety training
and training within a semi-immersive and interactive virtual pedestrian environment show
promise as effective strategies to train 7- and 8-year-old children to cross streets more
safely. Individualized streetside training in particular yielded consistently safer pedestrian
behavior compared to children trained for an equal amount of time using widely-available
videos and internet websites and compared to children who received no training.
These results are consistent with the existing literature on pedestrian safety training for
children (see Duperrex et al., 2002; Schwebel et al., 2012 for reviews). The present results
support other research that suggests individualized streetside training is effective to teach
children to cross streets more safely (e.g., Barton et al., 2007; Demetre et al., 1993; van
Schagen, 1988; Yeaton & Bailey, 1983). They also support initial pilots in non-immersive
virtual pedestrian environments that suggest pedestrian safety training in VR may be
effective (Bart et al., 2008; McComas et al., 2002; Thomson et al., 2005). Finally, they lend
support for the mixed results previously reported concerning training using videos and
software (Glang et al., 2005; Preusser & Lund, 1988; Tolmie et al., 2005; Zeedyk &
Wallace, 2003), indicating the need to be cautious in assuming children might learn to cross
streets more safely based on such educational programs.Schwebel et al. Page 11
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
The two training strategies that appear to be most effective, individualized streetside training
and training within virtual environments, each offer advantages and disadvantages to
schools, community centers, and others who may wish to train children in how to cross
streets safely. Individualized streetside training is laborious. It requires a competent adult
pedestrian to spend at least a few hours with a child, teaching the cognitive-perceptual
aspects of safe pedestrian behavior while offering repeated practice, with feedback about
success, at the task. One might compare this process to teaching a child to hit a baseball or a
tennis ball; repeated practice at the cognitive, perceptual, and motor skills needed helps a
child hone the skill, and feedback about the success of trials is valuable. Innovative
strategies to accomplish such training, such as the Kerbcraft program that recruits retired
older adults to train schoolchildren in the United Kingdom, are available and have empirical
support for efficacy (Whelan et al., 2008).
Training in a virtual pedestrian environment also offers the opportunity for repetitive
practice at the cognitive, perceptual, and motoric aspects of pedestrian behavior, but requires
less intensive individualized attention. In fact, virtual environments can be arranged to
permit children’s use without adult supervision. A significant disadvantage of training
children in virtual pedestrian environments is the lack of accessibility. Most schools and
community groups do not have access to virtual pedestrian environments, nor to the
financial resources to purchase them. Suitable alternatives that can be offered to large
numbers of children at minimal cost via the internet must be identified. One possibility,
currently under development in our laboratory (Schwebel & McClure, 2013), is the notion of
delivering a VR-type experience over the internet. If, as hypothesized, the key component of
pedestrian training is repeated practice at the cognitive-perceptual task of crossing a street,
then a sacrifice in realism that occurs from moving VR from a three-dimensional immersive
experience to a two-dimensional internet experience may not detriment training, and it could
be delivered globally to any school with internet access.
Our results indicate that one of the most widely-used training tools currently, a combination
of publicly-accessible videotapes and internet websites, was an ineffective training strategy.
Although videos and websites hold appeal due to their accessibility, our results indicate they
are a poor choice for interventionists.
We assessed pedestrian safety outcomes with two modalities (streetside and virtual reality
assessments) and multiple measures (start delay, hits/close calls, attention to traffic, and
missed opportunities). On the surface, it may seem that our results were inconsistent across
outcome measures. Pedestrian behavior is multifaceted, however; children do not simply
learn to cross streets safely, but rather must learn to attend to traffic, to judge the safety of
traffic gaps, and then to initiate movement into the street. Each of those components – and
they can be divided further into subcomponents – must be mastered for a child to become a
safe pedestrian.
Our results suggest that children trained in the virtual environment had fewer hits/close calls
in both field and laboratory assessments post-training. Hits/close calls with vehicles
represent a critical outcome of interest, as they reflect potential for serious or fatal injury.
The reduction in hits/close calls may be explained in part by the reduction in start delaysSchwebel et al. Page 12
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
shown by children trained in the VR; with more efficient cognitive processing of the
pedestrian environment, start delays can be reduced and safety improved. Interestingly,
children’s attention to traffic was inconsistent across measurement domains following
training in the VR, with greater attention demonstrated in the VR assessment following
training but lesser attention demonstrated in the field. Taken together, we might conclude
that training in a virtual pedestrian environment improves children’s cognitive processing
and safety but that influence on attention to traffic is unclear. Of note is the possibility that
children might have adequate attention to traffic prior to training – that is, by age 7 children
might typically show adequate attention to traffic in pedestrian settings because they already
have the developmental capacity to recognize the importance of looking for traffic when
approaching a street-crossing. It may be that the cognitive aspects of pedestrian behavior are
deficient and in need of practice and training at age 7 or 8, not the attentional aspects. This
possibility is supported by the fact that looks per minute reported in the present sample are
comparable to those reported in our previous work with samples of adults (Stavrinos,
Byington, & Schwebel, 2011; Schwebel et al., 2012) and adolescents ages 14–15 (Davis,
Avis, & Schwebel, in press). In contrast, children’s scores on hits/close calls, start delay, and
missed opportunities are generally far inferior to those reported among adults and
adolescents, even after training. Also of note is the fact that traffic volume and density was
consistent, constant and rather thick in the VR but varied much more greatly in the field,
where natural traffic patterns, with larger gaps and more irregular density and volume across
participants emerged.
Children trained individually at streetside locations showed longer start delays posttraining
that became much shorter at follow-up in both field and VR assessments. Thus, there is
evidence that streetside training improves children’s cognitive processing of pedestrian
situations. Our results were somewhat inconsistent across assessment strategies for measures
of attention and hits/close calls among children trained streetside, however. Children trained
with videos/internet programs demonstrated little improvement in any domains of pedestrian
behavior in post-training assessments.
We considered post-training pedestrian behavior on two occasions, both immediately post-
training and at a six-month follow-up visit. Individual trends varied somewhat across
components of pedestrian behavior and across measurement strategies, but the general trend
was for safety improvements to be retained over the six-month follow-up period. Of course,
children also experienced six months of development in cognition, perception, and other
relevant pedestrian skills during that half-year, as represented by improved scores among the
control group on several relevant measures.
Like all research, this study had limitations. One limitation was a measurement issue.
Although all participating children were given orientation trials in the VR before data were
collected, children in the VR training group had extensive experience in the VR, and that
practice may potentially have impacted their performance in the VR assessment trials.
Similarly, children trained in streetside locations had more practice deciding when to cross
in streetside simulations and therefore may have had elevated performance in field
assessment trials (though note that field assessments were deliberately conducted in a
different location than streetside training sessions).Schwebel et al. Page 13
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
A second limitation is specific to the streetside assessment trials. Naturalistic field trials
offer advantages. Specifically, they incorporate real traffic patterns, which typically involve
clusters of heavy traffic followed by “windows” of light traffic. However, inevitably some
children experienced heavier traffic density during field trials than others. Periodic large
windows of light traffic provided easy crossing opportunities and reduced variance in some
outcome measures. Close call opportunities were rarer in the field trials, and missed
opportunities were so rare that we were unable to assess them meaningfully in the field, as a
very large portion of the sample had no missed opportunities at all in the field. These
inconsistencies in the naturalistic trials may partly explain why results varied somewhat
across outcome measurement strategies.
A third limitation is the sample size. Although our a priori  power analyses indicated a
sample of 240, accounting for attrition, would be adequate to detect medium effect sizes, it
was not sufficient to detect smaller effect sizes that may be meaningful and important to
public health. Several of the findings were statistical trends that may prove significant in
larger replications as well as in applied community practice where large numbers of children
are trained. Finally, our study focused only on mid-block unsignalled crossings. We did not
assess learning or behavior at signaled intersections or other aspects of pedestrian skill that
may lead to injury risk.
In conclusion, this RCT suggests 7- and 8-year-old children may gain critical streetcrossing
knowledge through training in a VR environment or individualized streetside training.
Future research should build from these findings to develop, evaluate, and then implement
lowcost methods to train children in pedestrian safety that can be disseminated widely.
Supplementary Material
Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Elizabeth O’Neal, Anna Johnston, Ksenia Shingareva, and the students of the UAB Youth Safety Lab for
their extensive help with data collection, entry, and coding; Jodie Plumert and Kathy Christoffel for consulting
advice; Aeron Gault for IT support; and the Digital Artefacts team for VR development and support. The research
was supported by Award Number R01HD058573 from the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child
Health & Human Development. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health & Human
Development or the National Institutes of Health.
References
Agran PF, Winn DG, Anderson CL. Differences in child pedestrian injury events by location.
Pediatrics. 1994; 93:284–288. [PubMed: 8121742]
Bart O, Katz N, Weiss PL, Josman N. Street crossing by typically developed children in real and
virtual environments. OTJR: Occupation Participation Health. 2008; 28:89–96.
Barton BK. Integrating selective attention into developmental pedestrian safety research. Canadian
Psychology. 2006; 47:203–210.
Barton BK, Schwebel DC. The roles of age, gender, inhibitory control, and parental supervision in
children’s pedestrian safety. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2007; 32:517–526. [PubMed:
17442691]Schwebel et al. Page 14
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Barton BK, Schwebel DC, Morrongiello BA. Brief report: Increasing children’s safe pedestrian
behaviors through simple skills training. Journal of Pediatric Psychology. 2007; 32:475–480.
[PubMed: 17012736]
Berry DS, Romo CV. Should “Cyrus the Centipede” take a hike? Effects of exposure to a pedestrian
safety program on children’s safety knowledge and self-reported behaviors. Journal of Safety
Research. 2006; 37:333–341. [PubMed: 16996086]
Cross D, Stevenson M, Hall M, Burns S, Laughlin D, Officer J, Howat P. Child pedestrian injury
prevention project: Student results. Preventive Medicine. 2000; 30:179–187. [PubMed: 10684740]
Davis AL, Avis KT, Schwebel DC. The effects of sleep restriction on adolescents’ pedestrian safety in
a virtual environment. Journal of Adolescent Health. in press.
Demetre JD, Lee DN, Grieve R, Pitcairn TK, Ampofo-Boateng K, Thomson JA. Young children’s
learning on road-crossing simulations. British Journal of Educational Psychology. 1993; 63:348–
358.
Demetre JD, Lee DN, Pitcairn TK, Grieve R, Thomson JA, Ampofo-Boateng K. Errors in young
children’s decisions about traffic gaps: Experiments with roadside simulations. British Journal of
Psychology. 1992; 83:189–202. [PubMed: 1611407]
DiMaggio C, Durkin M. Child pedestrian injury in an urban setting: Descriptive epidemiology.
Academic Emergency Medicine. 2002; 9:54–62. [PubMed: 11772671]
Dunn, LM.; Dunn, DM. PPVT-4: Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test. 4. Minneapolis: Pearson; 2007.
Manual
Duperrex O, Bunn F, Roberts I. Safety education of pedestrians for injury prevention: A systematic
review of randomised controlled trials. British Medical Journal. 2002; 324:1129–1131. [PubMed:
12003885]
Glang A, Noell J, Ary D, Swartz L. Using interactive multimedia to teach pedestrian safety: An
exploratory study. American Journal of Health Behavior. 2005; 29:435–442. [PubMed: 16201860]
Hotz GA, Cohn SM, Castelblanco A, Colston S, Thomas M, Weiss A. Pediatric Pedestrian Injury Task
Force. WalkSafe: A school-based pedestrian safety intervention program. Traffic Injury
Prevention. 2004; 5:382–389. [PubMed: 15545078]
Hotz G, De Marcilla AG, Lufti K, Kennedy A, Castellon P, Duncan R. The WalkSafe program:
Developing and evaluating the educational component. Journal of Trauma. 2009; 66:S3–S9.
[PubMed: 19276724]
Levene, H. Robust tests for equality of variances. In: Olkin, I.; Ghurye, SG.; Hoeffding, W.; Madow,
WG.; Mann, HB., editors. Contributions to probability and statistics: Essays in honor of Harold
Hotelling. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press; 1960. p. 278-292.
Lightstone AS, Dhillon PK, Peek-Asa C, Kraus JF. A geographic analysis of motor vehicle collisions
with pedestrians in Long Beach, California: Comparing intersection and midblock incident
locations. Injury Prevention. 2001; 7:155–160. [PubMed: 11428565]
Macpherson A, Roberts I, Pless IB. Children’s exposure to traffic and pedestrian injuries. American
Journal of Public Health. 1998; 88:1840–1843. [PubMed: 9842384]
Martin SL, Lee SM, Lowry R. National prevalence and correlates of walking and bicycling to school.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2007; 33:98–105. [PubMed: 17673096]
McComas J, MacKay M, Pivik J. Effectiveness of virtual reality for teaching pedestrian safety.
Cyberpsychology and Behavior. 2002; 5:185–190. [PubMed: 12123238]
McDonald NC, Brown AL, Marchetti LM, Pedroso MS. U.S. school travel, 2009: An assessment of
trends. American Journal of Preventive Medicine. 2011; 41:146–151. [PubMed: 21767721]
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. WISQARSTM (Web-based Injury Statistics Query
and Reporting System). 2013. Retrieved April 18, 2013, from http://www.cdc.gov/injury/wisqars/
index.html
Plumert JM, Kearney JK, Cremer JF. Children's perception of gap affordances: Bicycling across
traffic-filled intersections in an immersive virtual environment. Child Development. 2004;
75:1243–1253. [PubMed: 15260875]
Preusser DF, Lund AK. And keep on looking: A film to reduce pedestrian crashes among 9 to 12 year
olds. Journal of Safety Research. 1988; 19:177–185.Schwebel et al. Page 15
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Pullen PC, Tuckwiller ED, Konold TR, Maynard KL, Coyne MD. A tiered intervention model for
early vocabulary instruction: The effects of tiered instruction for young students at risk for reading
disability. Learning Disabilities Research and Practice. 2010; 25:110–123.
Rothengatter T. A behavioural approach to improving traffic behaviour of young children.
Ergonomics. 1984; 27:147–160. [PubMed: 6723615]
Schwebel DC, McClure LA. Using virtual reality to train children in safe street-crossing skills. Injury
Prevention. 2010; 16:e117–125.
Schwebel, DC.; McClure, LA. Evaluation of usability and feasibility of an Internet-based virtual
pedestrian environment to disseminate a safe street-crossing intervention to children. 2013.
Manuscript under review
Schwebel DC, Davis AL, O’Neal EE. Child pedestrian injury: A review of behavioral risks and
preventive strategies. American Journal of Lifestyle Medicine. 2012; 6:292–
302.10.1177/0885066611404876 [PubMed: 23066380]
Schwebel DC, Gaines J, Severson J. Validation of virtual reality as a tool to understand and prevent
child pedestrian injury. Accident Analysis and Prevention. 2008; 40:1394–1400. [PubMed:
18606271]
Schwebel DC, Stavrinos D, Byington KW, Davis T, O’Neal EE, de Jong D. Distraction and pedestrian
safety: How talking on the phone, texting, and listening to music impact crossing the street.
Accident Analysis and Prevention. 2012; 45:266–271.10.1016/j.aap.2011.07.011 [PubMed:
22269509]
Shieber RA, Thompson NJ. Developmental risk factors for childhood pedestrian injuries. Injury
Prevention. 1996; 2:228–236. [PubMed: 9346096]
Stavrinos D, Byington KW, Schwebel DC. The effect of cell phone distraction on pediatric pedestrian
injury risk. Pediatrics. 2009; 123:e179–185. [PubMed: 19171568]
Stavrinos D, Byington KW, Schwebel DC. Distracted walking: Cell phones increase injury risk for
college pedestrians. Journal of Safety Research. 2011; 42:101–107.10.1016/j.jsr.2011.01.004
[PubMed: 21569892]
Stevenson M, Iredell H, Howat P, Cross D, Hall M. Measuring community/environmental
interventions: The Child Pedestrian Injury Prevention Project. Injury Prevention. 1999; 5:26–30.
[PubMed: 10323566]
Thomson JA, Tolmie AK, Foot HC, Whelan KM, Sarvary P, Morrison S. Influence of virtual reality
training on the roadside crossing judgments of child pedestrians. Journal of Experimental
Psychology: Applied. 2005; 11:175–186. [PubMed: 16221036]
Tolmie AK, Thomson JA, Foot HD, Whelan KM, McLaren B, Morrison S. The effects of adult
guidance and peer discussion on the development of children’s representations: Evidence from the
training of pedestrian skills. British Journal of Psychology. 2005; 96:181–204. [PubMed:
15969830]
Toroyan, T.; Peden, M., editors. Youth and road safety. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2007.
van Schagen, INLG. Training children to make safe crossing decisions. In: Rothengatter, T.; de Bruin,
R., editors. Road user behaviour: Theory and research. Assen/Maastricht, the Netherlands: Van
Gorcum; 1988. p. 482-489.
Warsh J, Rothman L, Slater M, Steverango C, Howard A. Are school zones effective? An examination
of motor vehicle versus child pedestrian crashes near schools. Injury Prevention. 2009; 15:226–
229. [PubMed: 19651993]
Whelan, K.; Towner, E.; Errington, G.; Powell, J. Evaluation of the national network of child
pedestrian training pilot projects. London: UK Department of Transportation; 2008. Available
from: http://www.dft.gov.uk/pgr/roadsafety/research/rsrr/theme1/childpedestrianprojects/
[Accessed October 14, 2010]
Whitebread D, Neilson K. The contribution of visual search strategies to the development of pedestrian
skills by 4–11 year old children. British Journal of Educational Psychology. 2000; 70:539–557.
[PubMed: 11191186]
Yeaton WH, Sechrest L. Critical dimensions in the choice and maintenance of successful treatments:
Strength, integrity, and effectiveness. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology. 1981;
49:156–167. [PubMed: 7217482]Schwebel et al. Page 16
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Young DS, Lee DN. Training children in road crossing skills using a roadside simulation. Accident
Analysis and Prevention. 1987; 19:327–341. [PubMed: 3675805]
Zeedyk MS, Kelly L. Behavioural observations of adult-child pairs at pedestrian crossings. Accident
Analysis & Prevention. 2003; 35:771–776. [PubMed: 12850078]
Zeedyk MS, Wallace L. Tackling children's road safety through edutainment: An evaluation of
effectiveness. Health Education Research: Theory and Practice. 2003; 18:493–505.Schwebel et al. Page 17
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 1.
CONSORT flowchart of study enrollment.Schwebel et al. Page 18
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
Figure 2.
Results from Field and VR Trial Outcomes: Group Means by Condition and Assessment
Point.Schwebel et al. Page 19
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptSchwebel et al. Page 20Table 1
Summary of Outcome Measures
Variable Assessing Type Units Possible Range
Field Measures
 Hits/Close Calls Dangerous Injury Outcomes Count Number 0–16
 Attention to Traffic Looking at Traffic Environment Continuous Looks/Wait Time 0-∞
 Start Delay Cognitive Processing Continuous Seconds 0-∞
VR Measures
 Hits/Close Calls Dangerous Injury Outcomes Count Number 0–30
 Attention to Traffic Looking at Traffic Environment Continuous Looks/Wait Time 0-∞
 Start Delay Cognitive Processing Continuous Seconds 0-∞
 Missed Opportunities Crossing Efficiency Count Number 0-∞
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptSchwebel et al. Page 21Table 2
Descriptive Data: Percentages and Means(SD)
Variable Overall (N=231) VR (n=59) Streetside (n=57) Video (n=57) Control (n=58)
Sex
 % male 43 46 39 39 48
Ethnicity
 %White 53 59 53 53 47
 % African American 40 39 39 40 43
 % Other/Biracial 7 2 9 7 10
Age (years)1 8.0 (0.65) 7.9 (0.67) 7.9 (0.68) 8.1 (0.63) 8.1 (0.63)
Mother’s Education
 % <= HS 10 10 9 11 10
 % Some College 29 27 35 28 24
 % College Grad 34 32 30 33 38
 % > College Grad 27 29 25 28 24
Father’s Education
 % <= HS 19 20 16 12 24
 % Some College 21 19 25 18 19
 % College Grad 29 29 25 33 22
 % > College Grad 30 27 23 33 29
Household Income
 % < $40k 27 22 26 28 28
 % $40k-<$100k 38 27 35 28 38
 % >= $100k 35 27 37 40 33
PPVT-4 IQ Screen1 106 (16) 107 (16) 108 (16) 104 (18) 105 (15)
Pedestrian Experience2 2.5 (0.3, 5.8) 2.1 (0.3, 5.1) 2.1 (0.5, 4.5) 2.5 (0.1, 5.7) 3.3 (0.4, 7.0)
1Mean (Standard Deviation) reported for this continuous variable.
2Median (25 thpercentile, 75 thpercentile) reported for this highly skewed continuous variable.
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author Manuscript NIH-PA Author ManuscriptSchwebel et al. Page 22Table 3
Descriptive Data: Outcome Measure Means (SD)
VR Streetside Video Control
Pre IV Post IV FU Pre IV Post IV FU Pre IV Post IV FU Pre IV Post IV FUp1
Field
Hits/Close Calls
(count over 16 trials)9.8 (3.5) 10.4 (4.6) 9.7 (4.6) 8.3 (3.3) 8.9 (4.3) 8.9 (4.1) 9.0 (3.9) 11.1 (3.5) 10.1 (3.4) 10.1 (4.1) 10.8 (4.5) 10.1 (3.9) 0.78
Attention to Traffic
(looks/wait time)14.0 (11.8) 11.4 (3.3) 11.2 (4.3) 12.3 (9.4) 12.4 (4.9) 11.7 (4.7) 11.6 (6.7) 13.2 (5.1) 13.1 (9.2) 14.8 (11.1) 15.3 (11.1) 12.3 (4.2) 0.25
Start Delay (seconds) 1.5 (0.70) 1.2 (0.59) 1.5 (0.63) 1.5 (0.66) 2.1 (0.99) 1.5 (0.62) 1.6 (0.78) 1.4 (0.74) 1.5 (0.59) 1.4 (0.59) 1.2 (0.61) 1.4 (0.67) <0.001
VR
Hits/Close Calls
(count over 30 trials)2.8 (1.6) 2.7 (1.6) 2.1 (1.4) 2.6 (1.6) 2.3 (1.2) 1.7 (1.1) 2.5 (1.7) 2.6 (1.6) 2.3 (1.5) 2.6 (1.5) 3.0 (1.6) 2.6 (1.6) 0.04
Attention to Traffic
(looks/wait time)27.1 (11.4) 33.2 (10.6) 35.2 (11.4) 28.7 (9.7) 27.8 (10.0) 34.1 (9.2) 30.2 (12.1) 32.2 (11.6) 32.3 (12.3) 29.3 (10.7) 29.7 (9.8) 34.2 (10.0) 0.02
Start Delay (seconds) 1.3 (0.44) 1.1 (0.46) 1.1 (0.43) 1.2 (0.40) 1.4 (0.45) 1.1 (0.31) 1.3 (0.57) 1.2 (0.51) 1.2 (0.38) 1.4 (0.47) 1.2 (0.43) 1.2 (0.45) <0.01
Missed
Opportunities (count
over 30 trials)2.7 (4.2) 1.2 (1.6) 1.6 (1.9) 1.8 (2.0) 3.9 (4.6) 2.3 (2.3) 2.7 (4.3) 2.1 (3.6) 2.4 (5.5) 2.2 (3.5) 1.5 (3.0) 1.3 (1.8) <0.0001
1P-value for interaction between time and condition in ANOVA model.
Note. IV = intervention; FU = follow-up. Hits/Close Calls are count. Attention to Traffic represents looks left and right divided by waiting time. Start Delay is seconds after safe gap appears before child
enters roadway.
Health Psychol . Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 July 01.
