STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
Randomised controlled trial of tailored
interventions to improve the management ofanxiety and depressive disorders in primary care
Henny Sinnema1*, Gerdien Franx1, Daniëlle Volker1, Cristina Majo1, Berend Terluin2,3, Michel Wensing4and
Anton van Balkom2,5
Abstract
Background: Anxiety and depressive disorders are highly prevalent disorders and are mostly treated in primary care.
The management of these disorders by general practitioners is not always consistent with prevailing guidelines because
of a variety of factors. Designing implementation strategies tailored to prospectively identified barriers could lead tomore guideline-recommended care. Although tailoring of imp lementation strategies is promoted in practice, little is
known about the effect on improving the quality of care for th e early recognition, diagnosis, and stepped care treatment
allocation in patients with anxiety or depressive disorders i n general practice. This study examines whether the tailored
strategy supplemented with training and feedback is more effective than providing training and feedback alone.
Methods: In this cluster randomised controlled trial, a total of 22 general practices will be assigned to one of two
conditions: (1) training, feedback, and tailored interventi ons and (2) training and feedback. The primary outcome measure
is the proportion of patients who have been recognised to have anxiety and/or depressive disorder. The secondary
outcome measures in patients are severity of anxiety and depr essive symptoms, level of functioning, expectation towards
and experience with care, quality of life, and economic costs. Measures are taken after the start of the intervention at
baseline and at three- and six-month follow-ups. Secondary o utcome measures in general practitioners are adherence to
guideline-recommended care in care that has been deliver ed, the proportion of antidepressant prescriptions, and
number of referrals to specialised mental healthcare facilities. Data will be gathered from the electronic medical patient
records from the patients included in the study. In a process e valuation, the identification of barriers to change and the
relations between prospectively identified barriers and improvement interventions selected for use will be described, aswell as the factors that influence the provision of guideline-recommended care.
Discussion: It is hypothesised that the adherence to guideline recommendations will be improved by designing
implementation interventions that are tailored to prospectively identified barriers in the local context of general
practitioners. Currently, there is insufficient evidence on the most effective and efficient approaches to tailoring,including how barriers should be identified and how interventions should be selected to address the barriers.
Trial registration: NTR1912
Background
Anxiety and depressive disorders are common mental
disorders that have a negative impact on everyday func-tioning, cause great suffering, and incur both highhealthcare costs and additio nal costs associated withproduction losses [1-3]. The lifetime prevalence of anxi-ety and depressive disorders in Dutch adults is about20%, and the 12-month prevalence is 10% and 5% [4],respectively. Most adults who seek help for their anxietyor depressive disorder are treated in general practice[5,6].
In the Netherlands, clinical guidelines are available for
both anxiety and depressive disorders for general prac-tice [7-10]. Enhancing guideline adherence is expected
* Correspondence: hsinnema@trimbos.nl
1Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction (Trimbos-institute),
Utrecht, the Netherlands
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleSinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75
Implementation
Science
© 2011 Sinnema et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.
to lead to reduction of the burden of disease and
improvement of social functioning [11,12]. The manage-ment of anxiety and depressive disorders by generalpractitioners (GPs) is not always consistent with prevail-ing guidelines. Under-reco gnition and consequently
under-treatment of anxiety and depressive disorders
have been reported, where threshold disorders are more
likely to be recognised than are subthreshold disorders[5,13-15]. About a quarter and a half of patients, respec-tively, receive optimal treatment for an anxiety disorderand a depressive disorder in primary care [16,17].Besides under-diagnosis and under-treatment in somepatients, other patients are over-treated with psycho-pharmacological drugs, wh ile these are not indicated
[5,18,19]. Use of effective early interventions in patientswith mild problems, which are often based on cognitivebehavioural techniques, is more the exception than therule [20]. The adherence to guideline recommendationsis suboptimal because of a variety of factors influencingGPs ’recognition and management of anxiety and
depressive disorders. These factors are related to (a)patients, such as lack of recognition of having a psycho-
logical problem, presentation of physical symptoms,
absence of a perceived need for care; (b) GPs, for exam-ple, lack of knowledge and sk ills, attitudes, time, self-
efficacy, patient-physician communication; and (c) orga-nisation of care, such as insufficient collaboration withmental health professionals and waiting lists for speci-alty mental healthcare [21-26]. In addition, some recom-mendations in the guidelines have less support from
research evidence or may be perceived as less attractive.
To improve adherence to guideline recommendations,
various implementation strategies can be effective for
improving professional performance in healthcare profes-sionals [27]. Many quality-improvement interventions inanxiety and depression care target provider knowledgethrough education on treatment guidelines and continu-ous performance feedback or they contain a fixed package
of multiple strategies, such as in the Quality Improvement
Collaboratives [28,29]. Other interventions in anxiety anddepression care target organisation of healthcare delivery,for instance, by involving mental health consultants[22,30]. The strategies show mixed and overall moderateeffects on clinical management of depression and out-comes in primary care.
Our hypothesis is that adherence to guideline recom-
mendations, and consequently patient outcomes, will beimproved by designing implementation interventions thatare tailored to prospectively identified barriers in the localcontext of GPs [23,25,31-33]. The choice of a study in tai-lored implementation is based on the assumption thatimplementation is affected by impeding local factors
related to care professionals, the organisation of care, andsocial factors. Successful implementation is only possiblewhen these barriers are dealt with through an implemen-tation plan tailored to the situation [34]. Different studieshave investigated the impact of tailored interventions forbehaviour change in GPs, to improve the quality of care,in randomised controlled trials (RCTs) [32]. Because thetailoring methods used in these studies are heterogeneous,
there is insufficient evidence on the most effective and effi-
cient approaches to tailoring, including how barriersshould be identified and how interventions should beselected to address the barriers. Therefore, we used a prag-matic and flexible approach of tailoring implementation tobarriers to change.
This article describes the aims and methods of an
RCT to determine the effectiv eness of tailored inter-
ventions in the implementation of guideline recom-mendations for the early recognition, diagnosis, andstepped-care treatment a llocation in patients with
anxiety or depressive disorders in general practice inthe Netherlands.
Methods/design
Objectives
The primary aim of this RCT is to determine the effec-tiveness of tailored interventions to improve the imple-mentation of guideline recommendations for the earlyrecognition, diagnosis, and stepped-care treatment allo-cation for anxiety and depressive disorders in generalpractice. Secondary aims are to describe the identifica-
tion of barriers for improving professional performance,the relationship between prospectively identified barriers
and improvement interventions selected for use, and the
influencing factors and experiences with the strategy.The final aim is to examine the efficiency of the tailoredintervention compared to usual care from a societal per-spective with a time horizon of six months.
Time frame
This study was initiated in 2009 and is planned to take
3.5 years.
Study design
A cluster RCT with two arms has been chosen for this
study. Cluster randomisation was applied at the level ofthe general practice organisation. The general practiceorganisations were allocated to the intervention or thecontrol group. The allocation was generated by an inde-
pendent statistician.
The chosen implementation strategies are
1. an educational intervention targeted at GPs, com-
prising of one day of training at the start and one feed-back at six months (in both study arms);
2. one or more interventions tailored to prospectively
identified barriers in the local context of GPs (only inthe intervention arm).Sinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 2 of 8
Recruitment of general practitioners
We aimed at recruiting patients and GPs in 22 general
practices into our trial. Therefore, we prepared a news-letter for GPs with information about the goals of thestudy; the activities; and the accreditation they wouldreceive if they followed the one-day training in guidelinerecommendations for the earl y recognition, diagnosis,
and stepped-care treatment allocation of patients withanxiety or depressive disorders. Several recruitment stra-
tegies were carried out: (a) the newsletter was published
at the website of the Dutch GPs association and thewebsite of the Trimbos Institute, a centre of expertiseon mental health and addiction and (b) the newsletterwas sent to a sample of 500 GPs, provided by the Neth-erlands Institute for Health Services Research (NIVEL)
and to all GPs who had a contract with a specific healthinsurance company that give s financial support. Subse-
quently, a researcher contacted all practices by phone torecommend participation. Finally, 23 general practiceswere included.
Recruitment of patients
We aimed at including patients with symptoms that mightindicate anxiety or depressi ve disorders. A sample of
patients who visit their GP from September 2010 will
receive an information letter with an invitation to partici-
pate and will be asked to fill out a short screening instru-ment: the extended Kessler-10 (EK-10). The Dutch EK-10is a validated screening instrument for anxiety and depres-sive disorders in primary care [35]. Of those patients whoreturn the EK-10 and give informed consent to call for theprovision of further information about the study, the scoreon the EK-10 will be calculated. Patients are considered
screen-positive if the score is 20 or higher and/or they
ticked at least once a ‘yes ’on the added questions 11
through 16. Screen-positive patients will be called andgiven further information about the study. Patients whodo not meet the exclusion criteria will receive a secondinformation letter, the baseline questionnaire, and a sec-ond informed consent form. Patients will be given theoption to complete the questionnaire in writing or digi-
tally. Inclusion in the study will be definite if the patient
returns the baseline questionnaire and gives informed con-sent for participation in the study. GPs are not informedabout the inclusion of their patient. Figure 1 shows a flow-chart of participating patients.
Patient inclusion and exclusion criteria
Inclusion criteria are an age of 18 years and older, a score
on the Dutch version of the EK-10 of 20 or higher, and/or
at least one yes on the added questions 11 through 16.Exclusion criteria are an age under 18 years, suicidal idea-tions, dementia or other severe cognitive disorders, psy-chotic disorder, bipolar disorder, dependence on alcoholor drugs, unstable severe medical condition as diagnosedby their GP, insufficient knowledge of the Dutch language
to fill out the questionnaires, or having received psycholo-
gical treatment in the six months before the start of thestudy or recognised with anxiety or depressive symptomsby their GPs in this period.Screening with Extended 
Kessler-10 +
1st informed consent
No response 
Excluded
negative Extended 
Kessler-10
Telephone contact:
 further information about 
study and check inclusion 
criteria
2nd informed consent
Time 1 questionnaires
(3 months)
Time 2 questionnaires
(6 months)No 2nd informed consent
No response Time 1
No response Time 2Excluded:
Not meeting inclusion 
criteria
Not wanting to participate
Time 0 questionnaires
No response Time 0
Figure 1 Flowchart of participating patients .Sinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 3 of 8
Sample size
The primary outcome measure for the evaluation of the
effectiveness of tailored interventions is the recognitionof anxiety or depressive di sorders by GPs in patients
with symptoms that might indicate these conditions.The rate of recognition was reported at about 45%[14,36]. Studies showed that interventions focused onprofessionals’ adherence to guidelines can increase
adherence by 10% [27]. With tailored interventions, we
suppose the recognition can improve by 15%. To get an
accurate estimate (alpha = 0.05; power = 0.80) of a 15%difference (45% vs. 60%) in recognition between bothgroups, assuming that 5% of participants will drop out(loss to follow-up will be minimal because we will per-form a retrospective medical record search to get insightin rate of recognition) and considering an intraclustercorrelation of 0.01 [37], 396 patients in 22 practices
have to be included.
Intervention group
Tailored strategies
GPs from the general practices randomised to the inter-
vention group will receive interventions that are tailoredto prospectively identified barriers in their local contextover the course of one year. Methods for tailoring imple-
mentation interventions to local barriers vary widely and
are often poorly documented [31]. To get insight in theexperienced barriers in the early recognition, appropriatediagnosis, stepped-care treatment allocation, and provid-ing of information on the diagnosis and stepped-caretreatment options for anxiety and depressive disorders, asemistructured face-to-face interview was carried out witheach of the participating GPs by a trained interviewer. For
this interview, we developed a checklist based on the main
types of barriers to adherence to evidence-based guidelineson anxiety and depressive disorders by GPs [25,28,38].Based on these main types of barriers, we developed inter-ventions that could solve the barriers. Each interview wasdocumented in a report. Based on this report, experts sug-gest interventions that may resolve the barriers. These
interventions are fed back by telephone to the GP by the
same interviewer.
The interviewer calls the GP once every two months
to map the implementation process and links this back
to the experts. Again, experts suggest interventions orgive advice to the interviewer for the next contact withthe GP. With a continuous feedback loop between theexperts, the interviewer, and the GP, we optimise thetailoring process. All contacts between the experts, the
GP visitor, and the GP are reported.
Training
GPs in both conditions received one day of training by
experts in (a) the early recognition of high-risk patientswith the Four-Dimensional Symptom Questionnaire(4DSQ), (b) appropriate diagnosis, (c) stepped-care treat-ment allocation, and (d) the providing of information topatients with anxiety and depressive disorders. The4DSQ is a self-rating questionnaire measuring fourdimensions of common psychopathology: distress,depression, anxiety, and so matization. The 4DSQ was
developed in general practice. The principal aim of the4DSQ is to distinguish between stress-related syndromes(denoted as ‘stress ’,‘burnout ’,‘nervous breakdown’ )a n d
psychiatric disorders ( i.e., depression and anxiety disor-
ders) [39]. The 4DSQ can be used in recognising high-risk patients for anxiety or depressive disorders and isrecommended by the multidisciplinary guidelines onanxiety and depressive disorders. Criteria for high-risk
patients are described in the clinical guidelines for anxi-
ety and depressive disorders for general practice. In a for-mer quality-improvement project, GPs showed positiveexperiences with the use of the 4DSQ in detecting anxi-ety disorders. The 4DSQ offers GPs a means to start talk-ing with patients with unexp lained somatic symptoms
about possible psychological or psychiatric disorders.
Adequate diagnosis is based on the recommendations
of clinical guidelines for general practice. Stepped-caretreatment allocation is based on the multidisciplinaryguidelines. According to the stepped-care model, patientswith a noncomplex anxiety disorder or a nonseveredepressive disorder have to receive as a first step briefinterventions, such as guided self-help or brief therapy.Patients with a complex anxiety disorder or a severedepressive disorder have to receive effective psychothera-
peutic interventions, an antidepressant, or a combination
of both. Determination of the complexity of an anxietydisorder is based on at least one of the following criteria:serious social/functional dysfunction, comorbidity(patient has another anxiety disorder or depression),obsessive compulsive disorder or posttraumatic stressdisorder, no response after a minimum of six weeks andmaximum 18 weeks, or no remission after a first-step
brief intervention. Determ ination of the severity of a
depressive disorder is based on at least one of the follow-
ing criteria: high level of distress, serious social/func-tional dysfunction, minimum eight symptoms of thedepressive disorder according to the fourth edition of theDiagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders(DSM-IV) [40], psychotic features, suicidal ideation.
Feedback
GPs in both conditions were asked to fill out a consulta-tion registration form for each patient who completedthe 4DSQ. On this form, GPs need to register the scoreon the 4DSQ, the diagnosis, the indicated treatment,and if they informed the patient about the diagnosis andstepped-care treatment options. GPs received individualfeedback on the number of registered 4DSQs, appropri-ate diagnosis, stepped-care treatment allocation, andSinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 4 of 8
information on the diagnosi s and stepped-care treat-
ment options in a report after six months, based on the
consultation registration forms.
Control group
GPs from the general practices randomised to the con-trol group only received training and feedback (see
intervention group).
Outcome measures
Primary outcome
The primary outcome for both conditions is the propor-
tion of patients who have been appropriately recognised tohave anxiety and/or depressive disorder. This proportionis calculated by dividing the amount of patients recognised
by the GP by the total amount of patients included in the
study. Recognition is measured by the registration of (a)anxiety or depressive complaints; (b) psychological com-plaints (anxiety, worrying, sorrow/grief, stress, feelingdown and sleeping disorder, unexplainable somatic com-plaints); (c) the Internation al Classification of Primary
Care-1 (ICPC-1) codes [41] for anxiety and/or depressionand/or related psychological problems, the same ICPC
codes that were used in previous work by Smolders [17];
and (d) the 4DSQ score.
Secondary outcomes
In patients
The secondary outcome measures in patients are severity
of anxiety and depressive symptoms measured with the4DSQ; level of functioning, measured with the World
Health Organization ’s Disability Assessment Scale II [42];
expectation towards and experience with care, measured
with the QUality Of care Through the Eyes of the patient(QUOTE) [43]; care utilisati on, illness, and work, mea-
sured with the Trimbos/institute Medical TechnologyAssessment questionnaire for Costs associated with Psy-chiatric Illness (TiC-P) [44]; and quality of life, measuredwith the EuroQol (EQ-5D) [45]. Measurement will take
place every three months: at baseline (T0) and at three
(T1) and six months (T2) after inclusion.
In general practice
The secondary outcome measures for both conditions areproportion of patients for whom tricyclic antidepressants(TCA ’s) or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors were
prescribed and number of referrals to specialised mentalhealthcare. We gather data to calculate the secondary
outcomes by performing a retrospective patient medical
record search, after the last patient ’s follow-up measure.
Process evaluation
In a process evaluation, we describe the identification ofbarriers to change and the relationships between prospec-tively identified barriers and improvement interventionsselected for use in the intervention group. We evaluate theexperiences of GPs in the intervention group, the GPvisitors and the experts with the tailoring process, theimplemented changes in practice, and the factors influen-cing the tailoring process. To measure the experiences,semistructured interviews ar e conducted, and reports of
the interviews are made.
To get an insight into the factors that influence the pro-
vision of guideline-recommended care in both groups, allGPs are asked to fill out an individual self-administeredquestionnaire about the general practice and GP character-istics. The practice characteristics include practice type,number of GPs in the practice, collaboration with otherhealthcare professionals working in the practice, and sizeof practice population. The GP characteristics includedemographic data, interest and attitudes towards depres-
sive and anxiety disorders, and questions to assess barriers
to healthcare provision to patients with depressive or anxi-ety disorders and, for implementation of the depressionand anxiety guidelines, collaboration with professionalsand institutions specialised in mental healthcare and GPs ’
levels of burnout. This questionnaire is developed andused in the Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety,an eight-year longitudinal cohort study designed to be
representative of persons with depressive and anxiety dis-orders in different healthcare settings and in differentstages of the disorders [24,46]. The questionnaire is filledout twice: before the start of the tailoring process andwhen the tailoring process is finished.
Economic evaluation
An economic evaluation will be conducted to estimate thecost effectiveness of the tailored intervention from a socie-
tal perspective. The between-group difference in costs will
be related to the difference in benefits in terms of health-related utilities. This economic evaluation uses the EQ-5D.The cost-utility analysis measures health in quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), derived using the EQ-5Dquestionnaire [47]. The EQ-5D characterises five healthdimensions (mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain, andanxiety/depression), each rated using three levels (no pro-
blems, moderate, and severe problems). Responses will be
transformed into a health utility score that ranges between0 = dead and 1 = full health. Health utilities will then beused to calculate the QALYs. This gives a comparison ofhow many QALYs individuals in each group gained onaverage as a result of the tailored intervention. Results canstatistically be compared to see if there are any differences.The final step of the cost-utility analysis will be to com-
pare the cost of the QALY gains in each group.
The costs of the implementation strategy used will be
studied for each practice. These costs are (a) the costs
per hour of the GP visitor and experts for the activitiesduring the tailoring process and the one-day training andfeedback, (b) material costs for the one-day training, and(c) the costs per hour of the GP related to the implemen-ted interventions. In addition, the difference in healthcareSinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 5 of 8
costs related to the diagnostic process will be included,
including number of consultations, diagnostic tests, andreferrals with diagnostic aims. Healthcare costs will bemeasured by the TiC-P. The costs will be estimated inline with the Dutch guidelines for cost calculations inhealthcare [48].
Apart from costs of the tailored strategy, healthcare
costs, and costs of producti on losses, indirect costs will
be measured for both groups related to the severity ofanxiety and depressive symptoms, level of functioning,experience with care, and quality of life.
Statistical analyses
The adequacy of randomisation is assessed comparing
characteristics of the general practice and GPs that might
influence the outcomes (see process evaluation). Recogni-tion of anxiety or depressive disorders in eligible patientsin the study period is compared between the interventionand control groups, taking into account clustering of datain a multilevel regression model. We will also calculate andcompare the percentages of patients who have been appro-priately recognised and diagnosed, prescribed antidepres-
sants, and referred and the number of consultations,
determined by the registration in patients ’medical records.
Descriptive statistics will be used to outline the charac-
teristics of practices and GPs. Finally, bivariate and multi-variate multilevel regression analyses will be performed toidentify factors associated with better adherence to specificguideline recommendations. All analyses will be per-formed on an intention-to-treat basis. Possible confound-
ing characteristics ( e.g., age, gender) will be included in the
statistical models.
In addition, we will describe the barriers for change that
were identified and the relationships between prospec-
tively identified barriers and improvement interventionsselected for use, based on an analysis of the records fromthe contacts between the GP and the interviewer. Dataabout the experiences of participants in the tailoring pro-
cess, the implemented changes in practice, and their ideas
about influencing factors will be structured, interpreted,and described in a qualitative way.
Direct and indirect costs of the interventions will be
reported. The results of the cost will be presented as meanvalues with standard errors. Cost effectiveness will be pre-sented in incremental cost-effectiveness ratios. The uncer-tainty will be assessed using bootstrapping, and
acceptability curves will be presented [49]. A principled
method for dealing with missing data will be applied tothe economic evaluation [50].
Ethical principles
The study protocol has been approved by the MedicalEthical Committee of the Institutions for Mental Health(METiGG; Utrecht, the Netherlands) in 2009.Discussion
Early recognition, diagnosis, and stepped-care treatmentallocation in patients with anxiety or depressive disordersin general practice is dependent on a variety of factors
influencing GP performance. The study gives information
about the relevant barriers for improvement and whetherthey differ between GPs. Designing implementation inter-ventions that are tailored to prospectively identified barriersfor improvement in the local context of GPs could lead tomore guideline-recommended care. Different studies haveinvestigated the impact of tailored interventions for beha-viour change in GPs, to improve the quality of care, in an
RCT, but little is known about what methods and models
of tailoring are effective and efficient [31,32]. The aim ofthis RCT is to determine the effectiveness of tailored inter-ventions to improve the implementation of guidelinerecommendations for the early recognition, diagnosis, andstepped-care treatment allocation for anxiety and depres-sive disorders in primary care and describe the methodsused in the process of tailoring. Because the performance of
GPs during the tailoring process may be influenced by pol-
icy developments, personal attention, or even externalfinancial incentives, the relationships between prospectivelyidentified barriers and improvement interventions selectedfor use will be described, as well as the factors that influ-ence the provision of guideline-recommended care.
Acknowledgements
This study is funded by ZonMW, the Netherlands Organisation for HealthResearch and Development.
Author details
1Netherlands Institute of Mental Health and Addiction (Trimbos-institute),
Utrecht, the Netherlands.2The EMGO Institute for Health and Care Research
(EMGO+), Amsterdam, the Netherlands.3Department of General Practice, VU
University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.4IQ Healthcare,
Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.5Department of Psychiatry,
VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
Authors ’contributions
AVB contributed to the design of the study and coauthored the article. MW
contributed to the design of the study and coauthored the article. BTcontributed to the design of the study, participated in the training of GPs,and coauthored this article. CM contributed to the design of the economic
evaluation and coauthored the article. DV coauthored the article. GF
contributed to the design of the study and coauthored the article. HScontributed to the design of the study and wrote this article.All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
Competing interests
MW is an Associate Editor of Implementation Science. All decisions on this
manuscript were made by another Editor. The authors declare that theyhave no other competing interests.
Received: 17 March 2011 Accepted: 21 July 2011
Published: 21 July 2011
References
1. Bijl RV, Ravelli A: Current and residual functional disability associated with
psychopathology: findings from the Netherlands Mental Health Survey
and Incidence Study (NEMESIS). Psychol Med 2000, 30:657-668.Sinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 6 of 8
2. Buist-Bouwman MA, de Graaf R, Vollebergh WA, Alonso J, Bruffaerts R,
Ormel J: Functional disability of mental disorders and comparison with
physical disorders: a study among the general population of six
European countries. Acta psychiatrica Scandinavica 2006, 113(6) :492-500.
3. Smit F, Cuijpers P, Oostenbrink J, Batelaan N, De GR, Beekman A: Costs of
nine common mental disorders: implications for curative and preventivepsychiatry. J Ment Health Policy Econ 2006, 9:193-200.
4. de Graaf R, Ten Have M, Van Dorsselaer S: De psychische gezondheid van de
Nederlandse bevolking: NEMESIS-2:opzet en eerste resultaten [NetherlandsMental Health Survey and Incidence Study-2] Utrecht: Trimbos-instituut [in
Dutch]; 2010.
5. Braspenning JCC, Schellevis FG, Grol RPTM: Tweede nationale studie naar
ziekten en verrichtingen in de huisartspraktijk 4:kwaliteit huisartsenzorg belicht[Second national study into diseases and performances in general practice 4:quality of GP care illustrated] Utrecht/Nijmegen: NIVEL/WOK [in Dutch]; 2004.
6. van ‘t Land H, Grolleman J, Mutsaers K, Smits C: Trendrapportage GGZ Deel 2
Toegang en Zorggebruik [Trend report mental health care Part 2 Access and
Care use] Trimbos-instituut, Utrecht [in Dutch]; 2008.
7. NHG Angststoornissen (eerste herziening) [NHG Standard Anxiety
Disorder: first revision]. Huisarts en Wetenschap 2011, 47:26-37, [in Dutch].
8. Van Marwijk HWJ, Grundmeijer HGLM, Bijl D, Van Gelderen MG, De Haan M,
Van Weel-Baumgarten EM: NHG-standaard Depressieve stoornis (eerste
herziening) [NHG Standard Major Depressive Disorder: first revision].Huisarts & Wetenschap 2003, 46:614-623, [in Dutch].
9. Richtlijnwerkgroep Multidisciplinaire richtlijnen Angststoornissen en
Depressie: Multidisciplinaire richtlijn Angststoornissen. Richtlijn voor de
diagnostiek en behandeling van volwassen patiënten met een angststoornis(Eerste revisie). [Multidisciplinary guideline anxiety disorders: guideline fordiagnostics and treatment of adult clients with an anxiety disorder: firstrevision] Utrecht:Trimbos-instituut [in Dutch]; 2009.
10. Richtlijnwerkgroep Multidisciplinaire richtlijnen Angststoornissen en
Depressie: Multidisciplinaire richtlijn Depressie: richtlijn voor de diagnostiek en
behandeling van volwassen cliënten met een depressie [Multidisciplinaryguideline depression: guideline for diagnostics and treatment of adult clientswith a major depressive disorder: first revision] Utrecht: Trimbos-instituut [in
Dutch]; 2009.
11. Adli M, Bauer M, Rush AJ: Algorithms and collaborative-care systems for
depression: are they effective and why? A systematic review. Biol
Psychiatry 2006, 59:1029-1038.
12. Andrews G, Issakidis C, Sanderson K, Corry J, Lapsley H: Utilising survey
data to inform public policy: comparison of the cost-effectiveness oftreatment of ten mental disorders. Br J Psychiatry 2004, 184:526-533.
13. Jackson JL, Passamonti M, Kroenke K: Outcome and impact of mental
disorders in primary care at 5 years. Psychosom Med 2007, 69:270-276.
14. Lecrubier Y: Widespread underrecognition and undertreatment of
anxiety and mood disorders: Results from 3 European studies. Journal of
Clinical Psychiatry 2007, 68:36-41.
15. Weiller E, Bisserbe JC, Maier W, Lecrubier Y: Prevalence and recognition of
anxiety syndromes in five European primary care settings. A report fromthe WHO study on Psychological Problems in General Health Care. Br J
Psychiatry Suppl 1998, 18-23.
16. Fernandez A, Haro JM, Martinez-Alonso M, Demyttenaere K, Brugha TS,
Autonell J, et al:Treatment adequacy for anxiety and depressive
disorders in six European countries. Br J Psychiatry 2007, 190:172-173.
17.
Smolders M, Laurant M, Verhaak P, Prins M, van Marwijk H, Penninx B, et al:
Adherence to evidence-based guidelines for depression and anxiety
disorders is associated with recording of the diagnosis. General Hospital
Psychiatry 2009, 31:460-469.
18. Cardol M, Van Dijk L, de Jong LD, de Bakker DH, Westert GP: Tweede
nationale studie naar ziekten en verrichtingen in de huisartsenpraktijk.
Huisartsenzorg: wat doet de poortwachter? [Second national study intodiseases and performances in general practice. General Practitionar care: whatdoes the gatekeeper?] Utrecht/Bilthoven: NIVEL/RIVM [in Dutch]; 2004.
19. Spies T, Mokking H, De Vries Robbe P, Grol R: Huisarts kiest vaak voor
antidepressiva onafhankelijk van de ernst van de depressie [GeneralPractitioner often chooses antidepressants, irrespective of depressionseverity]. Huisarts & Wetenschap 2004, 47:364-367, [in Dutch].
20. Willemse GR, Smit F, Cuijpers P, Tiemens BG: Minimal-contact
psychotherapy for sub-threshold depression in primary care.
Randomised trial. Br J Psychiatry 2004, 185:416-421.21. Cabana MD, Rand CS, Powe NR, Wu AW, Wilson MH, Abboud PA, et al:
Why don ’t physicians follow clinical practice guidelines? A framework
for improvement. JAMA 1999, 282:1458-1465.
22. Heideman J, van RE, van LN, de LS, Laurant M, Wensing M, et al:
Interventions to improve management of anxiety disorders in generalpractice: a systematic review. Br J Gen Pract 2005, 55:867-874.
23. Smolders M, Laurant M, van WA, Grol R, Wensing M: What determines the
management of anxiety disorders and its improvement? J Eval Clin Pract
2008, 14:259-265.
24. Smolders M, Laurant M, Verhaak P, Prins M, van Marwijk H, Penninx B, et al:
Which physician and practice characteristics are associated withadherence to evidence-based guidelines for depressive and anxiety
disorders? Medical Care 2010, 48:240-248.
25. van Rijswijk E, van Hout H, van de Lisdonk E, Zitman F, van Weel C: Barriers
in recognising, diagnosing and managing depressive and anxietydisorders as experienced by Family Physicians; a focus group study. BMC
Fam Pract 2009, 10:52.
26. Verhaak PFM, Prins MA, Spreeuwenberg P, Draisma S, van Balkom TJLM,
Bensing JM, et al:Receiving treatment for common mental disorders.
General Hospital Psychiatry 2009, 31:46-55.
27. Grimshaw JM, Thomas RE, MacLennan G, Fraser C, Ramsay CR, Vale L, et al:
Effectiveness and efficiency of guideline dissemination andimplementation strategies. Health Technology Assessment 2004, 8:i.
28. Franx G, Meeuwissen JA, Sinnema H, Spijker J, Huyser J, Wensing M, et al:
Quality improvement in depression care in the Netherlands: theDepression Breakthrough Collaborative. A quality improvement report.Int J Integr Care 2009, 9:e84.
29. Katzelnick DJ, Von Korff M, Chung H, Provost LP, Wagner EH: Applying
depression-specific
change concepts in a collaborative breakthrough
series. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf 2005, 31:386-397.
30. Bower P, Sibbald B: On-site mental health workers in primary care:
effects on professional practice. Cochrane Database Of Systematic Reviews
(Online) 2000, CD000532.
31. Bosch M, van der Weijden T, Wensing M, Grol R: Tailoring quality
improvement interventions to identified barriers: a multiple caseanalysis. J Eval Clin Pract 2007, 13:161-168.
32. Baker R, Camosso-Stefinovic J, Gillies C, Shaw EJ, Cheater F, Flottorp S, et al:
Tailored interventions to overcome identified barriers to change: effectson professional practice and health care outcomes. Cochrane Database
Of Systematic Reviews (Online) 2010, CD005470.
33. Wensing M, Bosch M, Grol R: Developing and selecting interventions for
translating knowledge to action. CMAJ 2010, 182:E85-E88.
34. Grol RWM: Effectieve verbetering van de patientenzorg [Effective improvement
of patient care] Maarssen: Elsevier gezondheidszorg [in Dutch]; 2006.
35. Donker T, Comijs H, Cuijpers P, Terluin B, Nolen W, Zitman F, et al:The
validity of the Dutch K10 and extended K10 screening scales fordepressive and anxiety disorders. Psychiatry Research 2010, 176:45-50.
36. Hickie IB, Davenport TA, Scott EM, Hadzi-Pavlovic D, Naismith SL,
Koschera A: Unmet need for recognition of common mental disorders in
Australian general practice. The Medical Journal Of Australia 2001,
175(Suppl) :S18-S24.
37. Adams G, Gulliford MC, Ukoumunne OC, Eldridge S, Chinn S, Campbell MJ:
Patterns of intra-cluster correlation from primary care research to informstudy design and analysis. J Clin Epidemiol 2004, 57:785-794.
38. Henke RM, Chou AF, Chanin JC, Zides AB, Scholle SH: Physician attitude
toward depression care interventions: implications for
implementation of quality improvement initiatives. Implementation
Science: IS 2008, 3:40.
39. Terluin B, van Marwijk HW, Ader HJ, de Vet HC, Penninx BW, Hermens ML,
et al:The Four-Dimensional Symptom Questionnaire (4DSQ): a validation
study of a multidimensional self-report questionnaire to assess distress,
depression, anxiety and somatization. BMC Psychiatry 2006, 6:34.
40. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. 4 edition. Washington
D.C.; 1994.
41. Lamberts HWM: International Classification of Primary Care (ICPC) Oxford:
Oxford University Press; 1990.
42. Chwastiak LA, Von Korff M: Disability in depression and back pain
Evaluation of the World Health Organization Disability AssessmentSchedule (WHO DAS II) in a primary care setting. Journal of Clinical
Epidemiology 2003, 56:507-514.Sinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 7 of 8
43. Sixma HJ, Kerssens JJ, van Campen C, Peters L: Quality of care from the
patients ’perspective: from theoretical concept to a new measuring
instrument. Health Expectations 1998, 1:82-95.
44. Hakkaart-van Roijen L: Manual Trimbos/iMTA questionnaire for costs
associated with psychiatric illness [in Dutch] Rotterdam: Institute for Medical
Technology Assessment; 2002.
45. Euroqol group: Eq-5D user guide Rotterdam: Sanders instituut, EUR; 1995.
46. Penninx BWJH, Beekman ATF, Johannes HS, Zitman FG, Nolen WA,
Spinhoven P, et al:The Netherlands Study of Depression and Anxiety
(NESDA): Rationale, objectives and methods. International Journal of
Methods in Psychiatric Research 2008, 17:121-140.
47. Brooks R: EuroQol: the current state of play. Health Policy (Amsterdam,
Netherlands) 1996, 37:53-72.
48. Oostenbrink J, Bouwmans CA, Koopmanschap M, Rutten FF: Handleiding
voor kostenonderzoek, methoden en standaard kostprijzen voor economische
evaluaties in de gezondheidszorg [Manual for Research on Costs, Methods andStandardized Cost Prices for Economic Evaluation in Health Care] [in Dutch]
College voor zorgverzekeringen [Insurance Board]; 2004.
49. van Hout BA, Al MJ, Gordon GS, Rutten FF: Costs, effects and C/E-ratios
alongside a clinical trial. Health Econ 1994, 3:309-319.
50. Oostenbrink J: Methods to Analyse Cost Data of Patients Who Withdraw
in a Clinical Trial Setting. PharmacoEconomics 2003, 21:1103-1112.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-6-75
Cite this article as: Sinnema et al .:Randomised controlled trial of
tailored interventions to improve the management of anxiety anddepressive disorders in primary care. Implementation Science 2011 6:75.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitSinnema et al .Implementation Science 2011, 6:75
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/6/1/75Page 8 of 8
