STUDY PROTOCOL Open Access
A cluster randomized Hybrid Type III trial testing
an implementation support strategy to facilitate
the use of an evidence-based practice in VA
homeless programs
David A. Smelson1,2,3*, Matthew Chinman1,4,5, Sharon McCarthy1,4, Gordon Hannah1,4, Leon Sawh1
and Mark Glickman2,6
Abstract
Background: The Housing and Urban Development-Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing (HUD-VASH) program is
one of the largest initiatives to end Veteran homelessness. However, mental health and substance use disorders
continue to reduce client stability and impede program success. HUD-VASH programs do not consistently employ
evidence-based practices that address co-occurring mental health and substance use disorders. This paper presents
a study protocol to evaluate the implementation of an evidence-based, co-occurring disorder treatment called
Maintaining Independence and Sobriety Through Systems Integration, Outreach, and Networking —Veterans Edition
(MISSION-Vet) in HUD-VASH using an implementation strategy called Getting To Outcomes (GTO).
Methods/design: In three large VA Medical Centers, this Hybrid Type III trial will randomize case managers and
their clients by HUD-VASH sub-teams to receive either MISSION-Vet Implementation as Usual (IU —standard training
and access to the MISSION-Vet treatment manuals) or MISSION-Vet implementation augmented by GTO. In addition
to testing GTO, effectiveness of the treatment (MISSION-Vet) will be assessed using existing Veteran-level data from
the HUD-VASH data monitoring system. This project will compare GTO and IU case managers and their clients on
the following variables: (1) fidelity to the MISSION-Vet intervention; (2) proportion of time the Veteran is housed; (3)
mental health, substance use, and functional outcome s among Veterans; and (4) factors key to the successful
deployment of a new treatment as specified by the Rea ch, Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, and
Maintenance (RE-AIM) model.
Discussion: This project is an important step for developing an implementation strategy to increase adoption of
evidence-based practice use in VA homeless programs, and to further examine efficacy of MISSION-Vet in HUD-VASH.
This project has important implications for program managers, policy makers, and researchers within the homelessness
field. VA Central IRB approval for this study was granted in October 2011. The three sites were trained on MISSION-Vet
and GTO in the first half of 2013. The first GTO planning meetings began after training occurred, between January 2013
and November 2013, across the three sites. The data collection —via a fidelity measure embedded into the VA
Computerized Patient Record System —began as each site initiated MISSION-Vet, between April 2013 and January
2014.
Trial registration: ClinicalTrials.gov: NCT01430741
Keywords: Implementation support, Co-occurring disorders, Fidelity, Training, Technical assistance
* Correspondence: David.Smelson@umassmed.edu
1VA National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans, Bedford, MA, USA
2VA Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research,
Bedford, MA, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2015 Smelson et al.; licensee BioMed Central. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly credited. The Creative Commons Public Domain
Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article,
unless otherwise stated.Smelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 
DOI 10.1186/s13012-015-0267-4
Background
Up to 80 % of Veterans who are homeless suffer from
mental health and/or substance use disorders, which
threatens housing stability and can result in higher rates
of relapse, treatment dropout, poor community integra-
tion, and utilization of costly emergency and inpatient
services [1]. Initially announced in 2009, a major goal
for the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has been to
end Veteran homelessness by the end of 2015 [2]. To
sustain housing placements for Veterans who are
formerly homeless, it is critical to integrate mental
health and substance use treatments and wraparound
supports [3]. While a number of treatment models have
done this effectively, one evidence-based practice called
Maintaining Independence and Sobriety through Sys-
tems Integration, Outreach, and Networking —Veterans
Edition, or MISSION-Vet, wa s developed specifically
for homeless and/or formerly homeless Veterans with
co-occurring mental health and substance use disor-
ders [4, 5]. However, incorporating MISSION-Vet into
HUD-VASH —a national program that combines subsi-
dized housing vouchers (individual Veterans receive
“vouchers ”for subsidized housing) from HUD and case
management services from VA —c a nb eac h a l l e n g ea s
HUD-VASH has dramatically increased the number of
Veterans served since 2008, resulting in larger caseload
sizes and a need to prioritize housing placement [6].
This paper presents the protocol for a study testing
strategies for proactively supporting the implementa-
tion of MISSION-Vet in HUD-VASH.
Despite a strong evidence base and support by the VA
nationally for use of MISSION-Vet in HUD-VASH,
wide-scale implementation has not occurred. MISSION-
Vet has a brief, free, web-based training offered by the de-
velopers, as well as an accompanying Treatment Manual
[4] and Consumer Workbook [5]. MISSION-Vet materials
are available for free download on the National Center ’s
website (http://www.umassmed.edu/psychiatry/national-
center-on-homelessness-among-veterans/products/). Fur-
ther, MISSION-Vet shares some of the same techniques
and treatment philosophies currently used by HUD-
VASH, including Housing First (described below)
[7]. Research using the Consolidated Framework for
Implementation Research (CFIR) shows that national
momentum, concrete tools, and compatibility with
host sites are important factors that facilitate implemen-
tation. However, it cannot be assumed that prior efficacy
of MISSION-Vet will automatically translate into success
in HUD-VASH [8]. Systems do not always adopt new
practices even when they are known to improve outcomes
[9]. A number of studies have confirmed that factors at
both the individual level (e.g., training, skills, efficacy, and
involvement in decision making) and organizational level
(organization size, climate, financial resources, and activesupport for evidence-based practices among the staff and
administrators) predict successful implementation of evi-
dence-based programs [10 –15]. Existing implementation
literature also suggests that active, innovative strategies are
needed at both of these levels to encourage adoption, while
passive approaches such as trainings alone does not result
in change, as attendees often experience barriers to incorp-
orating new practices into their work [15].
To facilitate the adoption of MISSION-Vet within
HUD-VASH, we propose the use of the Getting To Out-
comes (GTO) approach. GTO is both an implementation
model —specifying the steps the staff should take when car-
rying out an evidence-based practice (EBP) such as MIS-
SION-Vet —and an implementation strategy , providing
ongoing implementation training, technical assistance, and
data feedback to improve practitioners ’capacity to
complete those steps [16]. While MISSION-Vet manuals
promote fidelity to the treatment approach, GTO addresses
system-level implementation barriers commonly found
when providers begin to deliver a new treatment. It does so
by building support among the staff in the use of the EBP,
enhancing skills to complete needed tasks, and working
collaboratively with the staff to tailor the EBP to the specific
local site conditions. We received funding from the VA
Quality Enhancement Research Initiative to compare
MISSION-Vet implementation with and without GTO sup-
port in three large VA HUD-VASH sites.
HUD-VASH program
HUD-VASH started as a 20-site demonstration project
in 1992 and is now available at all VA medical centers.
Recently, HUD-VASH has experienced two significant
changes. First, the program was expanded to help sup-
port the goal of ending homelessness among Veterans.
For example, between 2008 and 2014, HUD and the VA
committed almost 70,000 additional vouchers, and the
VA has funded over 3000 new case management posi-
tions [17]. Despite these new case manager hires, case-
load sizes have increased for case managers. Second,
HUD-VASH has increasingly adopted the Housing First
philosophy, which states that individuals do not need to
demonstrate a set period of sobriety in order to be con-
sidered eligible for housing and case management ser-
vices, nor does non-adherence with case management
necessarily lead to loss of housing [7]. In HUD-VASH,
ongoing case management services are intended to serve
as critical wraparound support to assist Veterans in re-
covery from substance abuse and/or mental illness while
they continue to receive housing benefits. However, a
study of 36 HUD-VASH sites found that the types and
intensity of supports provided to Veterans tended to de-
crease over their tenure in the program, with less em-
phasis on rehabilitation-oriented activities [6]. While
HUD-VASH serves many Veterans with co-occurringSmelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 2 of 10
disorders, the program does not routinely use an evi-
dence-based treatment model to address both mental
health and substance abuse issues, both of which can
threaten housing stability [6, 18]. Therefore, this study
uses GTO implementation support to encourage the use
of MISSION-Vet within HUD-VASH.
Methods
Overview
This project is a Hybrid Type III, cluster randomized
controlled trial [19] that compares MISSION-Vet Imple-
mentation as Usual (IU —standard training and access to
the MISSION-Vet treatment manuals) to MISSION-Vet
implementation augmented by GTO. This study is being
carried out in HUD-VASH teams at three large VA Medical
Centers over a 2-year period. Within each site, existing sub-
teams (case managers and Veterans they serve) are the
clusters that will be randomly assigned, which is particularly
appropriate when desiring to lessen the risk of experimental
contamination [20] of the imple mentation strategy. Blinding
in the traditional sense —e.g., data collectors blinded to sub-
jects’treatment assignment —will not be possible; however,
all data will be coming from secondary sources. As a
Hybrid Type III trial, it will emphasize the test of an im-
plementation strategy (GTO), while using VA ’se x i s t i n g
HUD-VASH data monitoring system to also assess the
effectiveness of the treatment (MISSION-Vet) [21] called
HOMES (Homeless Operations, Management and Evalu-
ation System). This design is appropriate when the imple-
mentation strategy has strong preliminary evidence, the
EBP in question has solid evidence but could yield weaker
outcomes in new or less controlled environments than was
present in efficacy trials, and the EBP has “implementation
momentum ”[21]. These conditions are present for
implementing MISSION-Vet in HUD-VASH, as will be
shown below. The trial assesses three sets of variables:
a) MISSION-Vet implementation (adoption, dose, reach,
fidelity), b) outcomes among HUD-VASH Veterans (men-
tal health and substance use, community functioning,
housing), and c) MISSION-Vet implementation barriers
and facilitators organized by the CFIR.
MISSION-Vet clinical intervention
MISSION-Vet is a flexible, integrated, co-occurring
disorder treatment model rooted in the Health Belief
Model [22] and is accompanied by a Treatment Manual
[4], which serves as a how-to guide that describes MIS-
SION-Vet ’s core components, suggestions for service de-
livery, and includes a number of appendices with
additional didactic materials. Optimally, each Veteran re-
ceives about 2.5 h of manualized services a week from a
case manager and peer specialist team. The core service
components of MISSION-Vet are critical time interven-
tion (CTI), integrated co-occurring mental health andsubstance use disorder treatment using dual recovery
therapy (DRT) delivered by a case manager, and peer sup-
port delivered by a peer specialist.
CTI [23], MISSION-Vet ’s core intervention, is a time-
limited assertive case management model intended to
reduce the risk of homelessness by providing additional
support to individuals with mental illness during the
transition from institutions (e.g., inpatient psychiatry
units, residential treatment programs, and homeless
shelters) to community living. The assertive outreach in
CTI is consistent with the role of case managers in
HUD-VASH. Unlike HUD-VASH, however, CTI services
are delivered in three phases of decreasing intensity:
Transition to community, try-out, and transfer of care.
In the transition to community phase, services are intended
to reinforce community living. In the try-out phase, the
case manager/peer specialist team begins to reduce service
intensity to help the Veteran test and readjust the commu-
nity-based support systems to fill any gaps. Visits in the
transfer of care phase are used to fine-tune the connections
established with community-based resources.
MISSION-Vet supplements CTI with 13 DRT [24 –26]
sessions delivered by the case manager. These sessions
are highly structured, include the use of motivational
interviewing [27] and relapse prevention [28] techniques,
and specifically target the co-occurring mental health
and substance abuse issues commonly facing homeless
Veterans. In addition to the 13 DRT sessions, peer spe-
cialists deliver 11 structured psycho-educational sessions
that are designed to empower Veterans to plan for a life
of stability, sobriety, and community integration. Peer
specialists give out the MISSION-Vet Consumer Work-
book [5] at the onset of treatment to promote treatment
engagement. Designed to serve as a compliment to the
Treatment Manual, the Consumer Workbook helps Vet-
erans integrate DRT and peer support concepts and in-
crease their engagement in outpatient services through
homework assignments, readings, and checklists.
In addition to CTI, DRT, and peer support, the MIS-
SION-Vet Treatment Manual provides case managers/
peer specialists with information regarding employment
supports [29] and trauma-informed services [30], both
of which have been found to be effective when used with
the target population. While each component of MIS-
SION-Vet has demonstrated efficacy on its own, when
integrated using the MISSION-Vet platform, they work
synergistically to increase treatment engagement, im-
prove mental health and substance abuse outcomes, and
reduce ER visits, re-hospitalizations, and recurring home-
lessness [31 –34].
Besides the MISSION-Vet Treatment Manual and
Consumer Workbook, MISSION-Vet also includes a
structured webinar training found in previous studies to
be successful in conveying needed information about theSmelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 3 of 10
model (Smelson et al., unpublished manuscript). These
2-h trainings provide an overview of the MISSION-Vet
treatment model and offer an introduction to the devel-
oped materials (manuals and fidelity measure). The
training also covers the role of the supervisor whose job
is to provide ongoing consultation ensuring fidelity to
MISSION-Vet. This training is part of the IU strategy,
along with key information on how to access and use
the MISSION-Vet Treatment Manual and Consumer
Workbook.
GTO implementation model and strategy
GTO strengthens the knowledge, attitudes, and skills
practitioners need to carry out evidence-based programs.
GTO does this by posing a series of steps practitioners
should follow in order to obtain positive results and then
provides practitioners with the guidance necessary to
complete those steps with quality (i.e., to perform each
task as close to the ideal as possible). According to
GTO, “carrying out ”an evidence-based program in-
volves much more than service delivery to patients, and
the steps roughly correspond to three general areas: (1)
planning —e.g., developing goals and performance tar-
gets, ensuring the staff are trained in the evidence-based
program; (2) implementation —e.g., monitoring program
activities, maintaining adherence to an evidence-based
program model, supervision; and (3) self-evaluation —e.g.,
tracking patient outcomes, using data to improve program
operations. All of these steps are designed to be logically
linked so that the goals and performance targets are
linked to program activities that will meet those targets,
which in turn are linked to process and outcome
measures to assess if the targets are being met, which in
turn is linked to quality improvement activities that makes
use of the process and outcome data. For all these areas,
the guidance from the GTO approach comes in tools
(GTO Implementation Handbook), face to face training
for program (i.e., HUD-VASH) staff, and ongoing tech-
nical assistance provided by a GTO representative who
meets regularly with the staff to help complete the needed
steps. The goal is to work with leadership and staff to inte-
grate the practices GTO targets into routine operations,
closing the gap between research and practice.
GTO draws from multiple theories. It [16] is an opera-
tionalization of empowerment evaluation theory [35],
which states that positive results are more likely when
evaluators collaborate with program implementers and
provide them with the tools and opportunities to evalu-
ate and improve outcomes themselves. Consistent with
social cognitive theories of behavioral change [36, 37],
GTO training and technical assistance (TA) enhances
knowledge about GTO-related activities, which improves
attitudes towards these activities, improves execution ofGTO-related behaviors, and supports strong implemen-
tation of EBPs [38] and outcomes.
The GTO implementation strategy is also grounded in
implementation theory, for example, operationalizing the
CFIR to ensure that all the major domains that influence
implementation are considered [16]. Intervention char-
acteristics (e.g., evidence strength and quality, relative
advantage, complexity, adaptability), the first domain,
can influence whether practitioners adopt an interven-
tion. Without adaptation, many interventions are a poor
fit. GTO helps practitioners tailor interventions to fit
with their target population, organization, and broader
community. The next three domains of the CFIR com-
prise the outer setting (e.g., broader social, political, and
economic context including policies, incentives, and re-
sources), inner setting in which the intervention is im-
plemented (e.g., context of the specific organization or
group implementing the intervention including the
structural characteristics, relationships, and implementa-
tion readiness), and the characteristics of the individuals
involved (e.g., knowledge, skills). In this study, the inner
setting is the HUD-VASH team, the outer setting is the
broader VA, and the individuals involved are the HUD-
VASH staff. To create capacity and conditions for
successful implementation of programs, the GTO imple-
mentation strategy targets both individual staff and its
leadership (it is beyond GTO ’s scope to specifically alter
the broader social, political, and economic context of the
outer setting). The active change process designed to
facilitate individual and organization use of the intervention
as designed is the last domain in CFIR. GTO proactively
engages both the individual and program levels to establish
a systematic implementation process.
A great deal of research has been done to examine
GTO ’s effectiveness. With practitioners of drug preven-
tion programs, GTO has been found to improve the cap-
acity of individual practitioners and the performance of
prevention programs in both quasi-experimental and
experimental trials. In addition to homelessness, GTO
has been adapted to a number of other content areas in-
cluding drug prevention, underage drinking prevention,
teen pregnancy prevention, and positive youth develop-
ment [16, 39 –41]. Since its inception in 2004, more than
100,000 visits have been made to the website where the
GTO model is described and over 100,000 GTO Imple-
mentation Handbooks have been downloaded (www.ran-
d.org/gto).
Participation sites and recruitment
Site composition
This study includes three large HUD-VASH sites: site A
(450 HUD-VASH vouchers and 18 case managers), site B
(850 HUD-VASH vouchers and 27 case managers), and
site C (810 HUD-VASH vouchers and 24 case managers),Smelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 4 of 10
for a total of 2110 HUD-VASH vouchers and 69 case
managers. Case manager and voucher numbers were
based on a point in time and are expected to change as
new vouchers are issued over time. Each site has naturally
occurring sub-teams of case managers (sites A, B, and C
each has two clusters), which will be randomized with
equal probability to IU or GTO by the team statistician
using a random number generator. We chose to randomize
case managers within each of these sites because it holds
constant the variation due to site-level characteristics,
funding streams, regulations, data collection activities, and
political climates.
During the planning of the study, the three HUD-
VASH programs were selected because they were similar
across many key factors. For example, the number of
vouchers allocated to each site is close to 500 with 85 –95 %
of these vouchers in use at each site. HUD-VASH case
managers at each site are typically expected to have contact
with each Veteran at least once per month —with a goal of
contacting the Veteran at the Veteran ’s residence once he/
she has been housed. While some Veterans need more fre-
quent contact, no Veteran gets less than this amount at any
site. Among the Veterans in HUD-VASH at these sites, the
VA Homeless Network Coordinators report approximately
90 % having substance use and/or mental health diagnoses.
Additionally, each of these sites reports that approximately
75 % of Veterans in HUD-VASH receive other services at
the VA or in the community beyond standard HUD-VASH
case management services.
Recruitment
The subjects in this study are the HUD-VASH case
managers although data about the Veterans on their
caseload will also be collected. All case managers were
invited to participate and consented before randomization
by the study staff. The two sub-teams from each site that
were assigned to GTO or IU have approximately equal
numbers of case managers and vouchers, although the
exact numbers shift frequently due to staff turnover and
Veteran dropout, graduation, and the issuing of new
vouchers. Regardless, consistent with cluster random as-
signment, each case manager is linked to a certain sub-
team (and thus study condition), and each Veteran is in
turn linked to a specific case manager. If sites decide to
add new staff to a sub-team, that case manager would
then automatically be assigned to the condition of that
sub-team.
All HUD-VASH case managers in both groups will be
invited to the webinar training on MISSION-Vet. After
MISSION-Vet begins, case managers will be responsible
for engaging their Veterans into MISSION-Vet services.
Any Veteran participating in HUD-VASH at each of
these three sites is eligible to receive MISSION-Vet
services. Through training and TA, case managers andpeer specialists will be guided to follow the recom-
mended inclusion and exclusion criteria of MISSION-
Vet: (1) has a current substance abuse or dependence
disorder and a co-occurring mental illness and (2) is
willing to participate in MISSION-Vet services. How-
ever, the decision with whom to deliver MISSION-Vet
will ultimately be made by the case managers. MIS-
SION-Vet takes about 1 year to fully deliver; therefore,
Veterans will be invited to take part in MISSION-Vet in
the first year of the 2-year intervention period. The
study received a waiver of consent to use client-level
data already being collected as part of the homeless data
program management system of HUD-VASH.
GTO implementation strategy to support MISSION-Vet
implementation
The GTO implementation strategy is a capacity-building
system that, at each site, consists of a “GTO Planning
Team ”of HUD-VASH staff (led by a designated point of
contact) who will use the GTO process to plan MIS-
SION-Vet and the GTO TA staff person (Dr. McCarthy,
in Pittsburgh). The key components of this capacity-
building system are training and written tools, TA, and
the provision of tailored feedback based on MISSION-
Vet service data. In particular, the type of TA provided
in GTO is “facilitation, ”a consultation method that
emphasizes change in work practices through encour-
agement and action promotion [42, 43]:
(1)Training —In month 5, the Study Team (PI Smelson,
co-PI Chinman, TA staff McCarthy) will hold a
training with the staff and leadership at each site.
We will provide the standard MISSION-Vet training
for the HUD-VASH staff followed by a 6-h training
on how to use GTO to plan, implement, evaluate,
and conduct quality improvement on MISSION-Vet.
The MISSION-Vet training covers the MISSION-Vet
Treatment Manual, Consumer Workbook, fidelity
template, and other essential MISSION-Vet resources
[4,5], as well as core components and evaluation
findings of MISSION-Vet. The GTO training involves
walking the HUD-VASH staff through GTO ’sm o d e l
of planning, implementation, and self-evaluation, as
applied to MISSION-Vet.
(2)GTO technical assistance and tools —With guidance
from the TA provider, each HUD-VASH site will use
several GTO-based tools to plan MISSION-Vet that
were specifically developed for homeless staff as part
of the pilot project at the Pittsburgh VA
Homelessness Center in the manual Getting To
Outcomes in services for homeless Veterans :10 steps
for achieving accountability [44]. GTO is meant to
be a tiered system of support, with the TA staff
person meeting by phone, bi-weekly with each site ’sSmelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 5 of 10
GTO Team, and then receiving their own support
via weekly meetings with the PI and co-PI, who are
experts in MISSION-Vet and GTO, respectively.
This tiered model has been used in previous GTO
projects with success [ 45]. Using the written tools,
initial meetings of this group will focus on setting
goals and performance targets, planning on how to
tailor MISSION-Vet for HUD-VASH sites, identifying
any gaps in skills required by MISSION-Vet, and
arranging additional training. The TA staff person
( D r .M c C a r t h y )w i l lv i s i te a c hs i t ea tl e a s to n c ea
year.
(3)MISSION -Vet service tracking —Prior to the start of
MISSION-Vet implementation and during initial
GTO planning with each team, the study staff will
work with each site to integrate a MISSION-Vet
“fidelity note template ”into their local VA electronic
medical record (called Computerized Patient Record
System or CPRS). Each time the HUD-VASH staff
delivers MISSION-Vet, they will use the template to
record which aspects of MISSION-Vet were
delivered, generating a clinical note. We will then
extract this data and create feedback reports for
each site, to be discussed in GTO team meetings
once a month in order to stimulate quality
improvement efforts.
Measures, procedures, and analyses by study aim
All of the below measures will be collected for 3 years:
during the 2-year GTO period of support and 1 year
after that support ends to assess sustainability (see aim 4
below).
Aim 1: compare MISSION-Vet fidelity between GTO and IU
groups
Data source . Veterans served by case managers in the
GTO and IU groups.
Measures and data collection. The MISSION-Vet
Fidelity Measure tracks all the core elements of the MIS-
SION-Vet treatment model, including CTI, DRT, peer
support, vocational supports, and trauma-informed care
for each individual Veteran. The fidelity index consists
of 78 items assessing the presence or absence of certain
activities within MISSION-Vet. Taking the responses
from all non-missing items, we will compute a fidelity
score for each Veteran. The data will be extracted from
the VA Computerized Patient Record System (CPRS) on
all HUD-VASH Veterans served by case managers in the
IU or GTO conditions, at each of the three HUD-VASH
sites.
Hypothesis. We expect that Veterans served by case
managers who were in the GTO group will receive
MISSION-Vet with greater fidelity compared to those
who are in the IU group.Data analysis. We will fit cross-sectional linear random
effects (to account for clustering) models for the fidelity
score, measured at 12 months post-baseline.
Aim 2: compare the effect on the proportion of time the
Veteran is housed between GTO and IU groups
Data sources . Veterans served by case managers in the
GTO and IU groups.
Measures and data collection . For each Veteran enter-
ing HUD-VASH, a case manager must complete a HUD-
VASH Referral Worksheet that contains the program ’s
first assessment of days of homelessness and housing.
Then, case managers provide data every 3 months on
the number of days housed in the last 90 days using the
Housing Progress Report form. Case managers are also
required to report when a Veteran loses their housing
voucher each month. These reports are stored in na-
tional database called HOMES (Homeless Operations,
Management and Evaluation System).
Hypothesis . We expect that Veterans assigned to case
managers in the GTO group, who receive MISSION-
Vet, will have more days housed in the prior 3 months
compared to Veterans who receive MISSION-Vet from
case managers in the receiving IU group.
Data analysis . Again, we will fit repeated measures linear
random effects models in this analysis. As a secondary ana-
lysis, we will perform a ztest for the comparison of the
proportion of Veterans at the end the study who have
retained their housing (versus lost their voucher) between
GTO versus IU.
Aim 3: compare mental health, substance use, and
functional outcomes among Veterans served by HUD-VASH
case managers in GTO and IU groups
Data sources . Veterans served by case managers in the
GTO and IU groups.
Measures and data collection . In addition to housing,
the HUD-VASH staff complete data collection forms for
HOMES on four outcomes each month. HOMES re-
quires case managers to make separate ratings on mental
health, substance abuse, and associated problems for
each Veteran using components of the Addiction Sever-
ity Index [46] as well as the Global Assessment of Func-
tioning (GAF) [47].
Hypothesis . We expect that Veterans served by HUD-
VASH case managers supported by GTO, who received
MISSION-Vet, will have improved mental health, sub-
stance use, and functional outcomes compared to Vet-
erans served by HUD-VASH case managers in the IU
group.
Data analysis . We will again fit our repeated measures
linear random effects models to the response variables
mentioned above.Smelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 6 of 10
Aim 4: analyze MISSION-Vet implementation using the factors
specified by the implementation model RE-AIM (Reach,
Effectiveness, Adoption, Implementation, and Maintenance)
RE-AIM [48] states that successful deployment of an
intervention is mediated by the following factors:
Reach —the proportion of individuals reached by the
intervention; Effectiveness —the efficacy of the program
under ideal circumstances; Adoption —the proportion of
patients that used the intervention; Implementation —the
extent the intervention was well-implemented; and
Maintenance —whether the intervention was maintained.
While GTO provides guidance for successful implemen-
tation, the RE-AIM model provides a heuristic to judge
the success of that implementation.
Data sources . All aspects of the RE-AIM framework
will be informed by data from case managers in the IU
and GTO groups and the Veterans they serve.
Measures and data collection . Each RE-AIM measure
below, using data collected from aims 1 –3, will be calcu-
lated for both the IU and GTO groups:
/C15Reach —Obtained from aim 1, the Reach measure
will be the percent of all eligible Veterans who
receive MISSION-Vet with adequate fidelity (defined
as the endorsement of at least 75 % of the items on
the MISSION-Vet Fidelity measure).
/C15Effectiveness —Obtained from aim 3, effectiveness
will be the percentage of all eligible Veterans who
receive MISSION -Vet with adequate fidelity who
improve on each outcome in an amount consistent
with a statistically significant effect.
/C15Adoption —The proportion of case managers who
have more than 50 % of their eligible Veterans
engaged in MISSION-Vet will be judged to have
“adopted ”MISSION-Vet as a standard protocol for
Veterans with mental illness and co-occurring
substance abuse disorders.
/C15Implementation —The extent to which the
MISSION-Vet intervention was well implemented
will come from aim 1 and be expressed as the
percentage of eligible Veterans who actually
participated in MISSION-Vet who had adequate
fidelity (endorsement of at least 75 % of the items
on the MISSION-Vet Fidelity measure).
/C15Maintenance —The degree to which the successful
deployment of MISSION-Vet was maintained will
come from data collected through the previous
components of the RE-AIM model but extended a
year beyond the end of the GTO support. Thus, this
study will be able to assess whether MISSION-Vet
maintains a high Reach, Effectiveness, Adoption, and
Implementation between the end of the GTO support
and the last data collection wave, which will be a year
after the GTO support ends.Hypothesis . We expect better results across all ele-
ments of the RE-AIM model in the GTO group than in
the IU group.
Data analysis . The scores for R, E, A, and I will be cal-
culated among the Veterans in both the GTO and IU
groups during the 2-year period of GTO support. For
Reach , we will perform a ztest for the comparison of
the proportion of Veterans at the end of the GTO period
with adequate fidelity between GTO versus IU. The Ef-
fectiveness analysis will involve ttests comparing mean
scores at the end of the GTO period for the proportion
of time housed and homeless (on the logit scale), com-
ponents of the ASI, and the GAF. For Adoption , we will
compare the proportion of case managers through a z
test who have “adopted ”MISSION-Vet according to the
specified measure. We will also perform a logistic re-
gression of whether a case manager adopted MISSION-
Vet as a function of study arm, one of the moderating
variables, and their interaction, testing specifically for
the interaction term. The analysis of Implementation will
compare through a ztest the proportion of Veterans
who participated in MISSION-Vet who had a fidelity
score of at least 75 % between the GTO versus IU
groups.
Maintenance —The analyses described above for R, E,
A, and I will be similarly applied to the data collected
and summarized a year after the end of the GTO support
period.
Power analysis
We demonstrate that for aims 1, 2, and 3, we will have
at least 80 % power to detect intervention effects at the
0.05 significance level (aim 4 is exploratory and thus we
are not able to calculate power for that aim). Our power
calculations were performed using the power analysis
software G*Power 3.1.2 [49]. Previous studies examining
the effect of GTO used different measures than in the
current study. We therefore assumed effect sizes based
on a previous study of the effect of GTO on capacity to
carry out evidence-based drug abuse prevention pro-
gramming. The measures used in that study were of pro-
vider knowledge (effect size = 0.21 after 2 years of GTO),
attitudes (effect size = 0.38 at 1 year of GTO and 0.59 at
2 years of GTO), and skills (effect size = 0.07 at 1 year of
GTO and 0.28 at 2 years of GTO) all related to the per-
formance of practices associated with evidence-based
prevention programming [16]. These measures are rele-
vant because GTO will attempt to impact knowledge, at-
titudes, and skills in the proposed study as well, but in
this case around the use of MISSION-Vet. We use these
values as a rough guide for the effects we might expect
to detect for the current study, along with conventional
effect size interpretations.Smelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 7 of 10
For aim 1, we expect a total of 1604 Veterans to be
available for the fidelity measure computations. This
sample size assumes a reduction of 20 % from the initial
(approximate) 2110 vouchers available due to Veterans
not having co-occurring SUD and then another reduc-
tion of 5 % due to case manager refusal to participate.
The latter reduction brings the number of case managers
down from an initial estimate of 69 down to 66. Because
the study is cluster-randomized by case manager, the
sample size to detect effects is reduce by a “design ef-
fect”(Deff). The formula for the design effect is given by
Deff = 1 + ( m−1) ICC where mis the average number of
Veterans in the study per case manager and the ICC is
the intra-class correlation. The ICC of MISSION-Vet +
GTO effects clustered by case managers is unknown but
likely to be fairly limited as GTO is a system-wide inter-
vention. To be conservative, we use a conventionally
large value of ICC = 0.15 [50]. Based on the information
above, the value of mis approximately m= 1604/66 = 24.3.
Thus, the design effect assumed is Deff = 1 + ( m−1) ICC =
1 + (24.3 −1) (0.15) = 4.495. Therefore, the effective sample
size for aim 1 controlling for clustering is 1604/4.495 =
356 = 265 Veterans. For an unclustered design with an
available sample of 356 Veterans randomized to two study
arms, the smallest detectable effect size (ES) at the 0.05
significance level with 80 % power assuming a two-sample
ttest is 0.298. While this effect is of comparable or larger
size to those in the drug abuse prevention study described
above, this effect size, according to [51], is considered con-
ventionally to be between small (ES = 0.2) and medium
(ES = 0.5). Therefore, our sample size seems to be sufficient
to detect a small-to-medium effect size. The actual data
analyses will control for socio-demographic and other im-
portant confounders, so in fact we expect greater power to
detect fidelity differences due to MISSION-Vet + GTO.
For aims 2 and 3, we will focus on the subsample of
Veterans in the study for whom we have 12 months of
data collected over consecutive 3-month intervals. Be-
cause these Veterans serve as their own controls relative
to time, they provide the greatest power in detecting the
effect of MISSION-Vet + GTO. With the same design ef-
fect as in aim 1, the effective sample size available for
aims 2 and 3 controlling for clustering is 356 Veterans.
For a linear repeated measures model with two treat-
ment groups and five measurements per unit (that is,
one every 3 months for a year, including baseline), and
assuming a sample of 356 units to randomly divide ap-
proximately equally between the two groups, the time-
by-intervention effect size that can be measured with
80 % power is 0.082. By convention, this is considered a
very small effect size, and it is also small compared to
the ones found above in the drug abuse prevention
study. We therefore anticipate detecting effects with suf-
ficient power for aims 2 and 3.Design challenges
An important design issue is whether to randomize at the
site, provider, or Veteran level. We decided to randomize
at the HUD-VASH case manager level for several reasons.
First, the analysis of national HUD-VASH data showed
that the HUD-VASH site was the strongest predictor of
housing stability [6]. Therefore, it was important to hold
the site constant by having IU and GTO conditions
equally represented within each of the sites. Further, we
account for the effects of case manager clustering in our
statistical analyses. Second, we believe that the possible
contamination that may result between IU and GTO con-
ditions being present at the same site is manageable. In
the past studies of GTO, contamination did occur but was
moderate (across multiple programs, mean = 0.5 to 1.0 on
a 6-point index of possible GTO activities in which one
could engage) [16]. We have however, purposely selected
large sites in an effort to minimize the contamination as it
is believed that we can minimize discussion of GTO im-
plementation strategies more easily among non-GTO case
managers in larger sites. To minimize contamination fur-
ther given its potential confound, we decided to use natur-
ally occurring HUD-VASH sub-teams at each site so that
team meetings and other routine discussions between case
managers are handled in separate IU and GTO “teamlets. ”
Other limitations of the study include staff turnover and
changes in policy directives. Regarding staff turnover, we
anticipate some level of turnover, and our power analyses
show that we have a sufficient sample. Furthermore, new
staff in the IU sites will receive training on MISSION-Vet.
As for changes in the program directives, we acknowledge
that this is also a limitation as there is always ongoing ten-
sion between research and the need for patient care ser-
vices to make and respond to new directives to end
homelessness. However, our design —comparing an
organizational intervention like GTO to usual implementa-
tion strategies (regardl ess of how they may change) —is
therefore a genuine test of the impact of the GTO interven-
tion (and MISSION-Vet as well) in real-world conditions.
Thus, the findings that are produced may have greater eco-
logical validity —or relevance to real world conditions,
where circumstances do change. In addition, even if the VA
did make changes to HUD-VASH, the changes would apply
evenly to all HUD-VASH sites and all HUD-VASH case
managers and thus be equal across IU and GTO condi-
tions. Further, we would hypothesize that GTO would be
able to help HUD-VASH case managers incorporate the
changes for improved Veteran impact better than case
managers assigned to the IU condition.
Trial status
Central IRB approval for this study was granted in October
of 2011. The three sites were trained on MISSION-Vet
and GTO in the first half of 2013. The first GTO planningSmelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 8 of 10
meetings began directly after training occurred, between
January 2013 and November 2013 across the three sites.
T h ed a t ac o l l e c t i o n —via a fidelity measure embedded into
the VA Electronic Medical Record System —began as each
site initiated MISSION-Vet, between April 2013 and January
2014.
Discussion
As noted above, research evidence and passive dissemin-
ation strategies often do not change clinical practice or
increase the adoption of new practices. MISSION-Vet
has demonstrated evidence, yet has not been widely
adopted despite encouragement from the VA nationally.
This project intends to test whether a comprehensive
implementation strategy —Getting To Outcomes —can
aid in MISSION-Vet ’s implementation in HUD-VASH
and secondarily to evaluate the effectiveness of the
MISSION-Vet treatment. Further, this project will yield
important lessons about how and under what conditions
GTO support aids MISSION-Vet implementation. The
test will be challenging as HUD-VASH teams are under
increasing pressure to focus on housing placement to
meet Obama ’s administration pledge to end homeless-
ness. However, the case managers randomized to receive
GTO will have a number of additional supports to assist
with the implementation of the MISSION-Vet model
within HUD-VASH. If successful, GTO could be used as
a model to more widely support MISSION-Vet imple-
mentation or the implementation of other evidence-
based practices. In addition, study results will continue
to evaluate the efficacy of MISSION-Vet for the treat-
ment of homeless Veterans with co-occurring disorders.
This project is registered at ClinicalTrials.gov with
number NCT01430741 (URL: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
show/study/NCT01430741?term=sdp+11-240&rank=1).
Abbreviations
GTO: Getting To Outcomes; HUD-VASH: Housing and Urban Development-
Veteran Affairs Supportive Housing; MISSION-Vet: Maintaining Independence
and Sobriety through Systems Integration, Outreach, and Networking —
Veterans Edition.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
DAS helped conceptualize the study and wrote significant portions of the
manuscript, focusing on MISSION-Vet, the description of HUD-VASH, and the
HOMES system. MC also helped conceptualize the study and wrote significant
portions of the manuscript, focusing on Getting To Outcomes and RE-AIM. GH
conceptualized the analyses and measures and performed significant editing.
SM developed the technical assistance component of Getting To Outcomes
and performed significant editing. LS is a co-developer of MISSION-Vet model
and assisted with the conceptualization and editing of the manuscript. MG is
the statistician of the project. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.Acknowledgements
All the authors are funded by a grant from the Health Services Research and
Development Quality Enhancement Research Initiative, “MISSION-Vet HUD-VASH
Implementation Study ”(SDP 11-240). We would like to acknowledge the
contributions of Jesse Vazzano, Julianne Siegfriedt, Brittany Walker, and Rachel
Mullins for their assistance with this project.
Author details
1VA National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans, Bedford, MA, USA.
2VA Center for Healthcare Organization and Implementation Research,
Bedford, MA, USA.3Department of Psychiatry, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.4VISN 4 Mental Illness Research and
Clinical Center, VA Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA.5RAND Corporation, Santa
Monica, CA, USA.6Department of Health Policy and Management, Boston
University School of Public Health, Boston, MA, USA.
Received: 27 February 2015 Accepted: 15 May 2015
References
1. Shinseki E. Secretary Shinseki Details Plan to End Homelessness for Veterans.
2009. va.gov/opa/pressrel/pressrelease.cfm?id = 1807. Accessed 4 Feb 2015.
2. United States Interagency Council on Homelessness (USICH). Opening
Doors: a federal and strategic plan to prevent and end homelessness.
Washington, DC: USICH; 2010.
3. Shinseki E. HUD to provide permanent housing to nearly 8 000 homeless
veterans. 2015. hud.gov/portal/page/po rtal/HUD/press/pre ss_releases_media_
advisories/2010/HUDNo.10-117. 2010. Accessed 4 Feb.
4. Smelson D, Sawh L, Kuhn J, Kane V, Ziedonis D. The MISSION-VET Treatment
Manual: VA. Department of Veterans Affairs: Bedford, MA; 2011.
5. Smelson D, Sawh L, Rodrigues S, Muñoz E, Marzilli A, Tripp J. The MISSION-
VET Consumer Workbook. Department of Veterans Affairs: Bedford, MA;
2011.
6. O ’Connell M, Kasprow W, Rosenheck R. National dissemination of supported
housing in the VA: model adherence versus model modification. Psychiatr
Rehabil J. 2010;33(4):308 –19.
7. Kertesz S, Crouch K, Milby J, Cusimano R, Schumacher J. Housing first for
homeless persons with active addiction: are we overreaching? Milbank Q.
2009;87(2):495 –534.
8. Schoenwald S, Hoagwood K. Effectiveness transportability and
dissemination of interventions: what matters when? Psychiatr Serv.
2001;52(9):1190 –7.
9. Ennett S, Ringwalt C, Thorne J, Rohrbach L, Vincus A, Simons-Rudolph A,
et al. A comparison of current practice in school-based substance use
prevention programs with meta-analysis findings. Prev Sci. 2003;4(1):1.
10. McCormick L, Steckler A, McLeroy K. Diffusion of innovations in schools: a
study of adoption and implementation of school-based tobacco prevention
curricula. Am J Health Promo. 1995;9:210 –9.
11. Parcel G, Eriksen M, Lovato C, Gottlieb N, Brink S, Green L. The diffusion of
school-based tobacco-use prevention programs: project description and
baseline data. Health Educ. 1989;4(1):111 –24.
12. Rohrbach L, D ’Onofrio C, Backer T, Montgomery S. Diffusion of school-based
substance abuse prevention programs. Am Behav Sci. 1996;39(7):919 –34.
13. Rohrbach L, Graham J, Hansen W. Diffusion of a school-based substance
abuse prevention program: predictors of program implementation. Prev
Med. 1993;22(2):237 –60.
14. Steckler A. Toward integrating qualitative and quantitative methods. Health
Educ Q. 1992;19(1):1.
15. Cividin T, Ottoson J. Linking reasons for continuing professional education
participation with post-program application. J Contin Educ Health Prof.
1997;17:46 –55.
16. Chinman M, Hunter S, Ebener P, Paddock S, Stillman L, Imm P, et al. The
getting to outcomes demonstration and evaluation: an illustration of the
prevention support system. Am J Community Psychol. 2008;41(3):206 –24.
17. Department of Housing and Urban Development. HUD-VASH Vouchers.
2014. Portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD. Accessed 4 Feb 2015.
18. Kane V. National Center of Homelessness Among Veterans. VA
Homelessness Services: Washington, DC; 2010.
19. Donner A, Klar N. Pitfalls and controversies in cluster randomization trials.
Am J Pub Health. 2004;94:416.Smelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 9 of 10
20. Curran G, Bauer M, Mittman B, Stetler C, Pyne J, Fortney J. A new ‘Hybrid ’?
Combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation research
trials. Little Rock, AR: Poster presented at the VA HSR&D field-based meeting
on mental health and substance use disorders; 2010.
21. Curran G, Bauer M, Pyne J, Stetler C. Effectiveness-implementation hybrid
designs: combining elements of clinical effectiveness and implementation
research to enhance public health impact. Med Care. 2012;50(3):217 –26.
22. Becker M. The health belief model and personal health behavior. Health
Educ. 1974;2:324 –508.
23. Susser E, Valencia E, Conover S, Felix A, Tsai W, Wyatt R. Preventing
recurrent homelessness among mentally ill men: a “critical time ”
intervention after being discharged from a shelter. Am J Pub Health.
1997;87(2):256.
24. Ziedonis D, Stern R. Dual recovery therapy for schizophrenia and substance
abuse. Psychiatr Ann. 2001;31:255.
25. Ziedonis D, Brady K. Dual diagnosis in primary care: detecting and treating
both the addiction and mental illness. Med Clin North Am.
1997;81(4):1017 –36.
26. Ziedonis D, Smelson D, Rosenthal R, Batki S, Green A, Henry R, et al.
Improving the care of individuals with schizophrenia and substance use
disorders: consensus recommendations. J Psychiatr Pract. 2005;11(5):315.
27. Miller W, Rollnick S. Motivational interviewing: preparing people for change.
London: Guildford; 2002.
28. Marlatt G, Gordon J. Relapse prevention: maintenance strategies in addictive
behavior change. New York: Guilford; 1985.
29. Bond G, McHugo G, Becker D, Rapp C, Whitley R. Fidelity of supported
employment: lessons learned from the national evidence-based practice
project. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2008;31(4):300 –5.
30. Najavits L. Expanding the boundaries of PTSD treatment. JAMA.
2012;308(7):714 –6.
31. Smelson D, Losonczy M, Castles-Fonseca K, Stewart P, Kaune M, Ziedonis D.
Preliminary outcomes from a booster cas e management program for individuals
with a co-occurring substance abuse and a persistent psychiatric disorder. J Dual
Diagn. 2005;3(1):47 –59.
32. Smelson D, Williams J, Ziedonis D, Losonczy M, Kaune M. The efficacy of
clonazepam for decreasing cue-elicited craving in individuals with
schizophrenia and cocaine dependence: a preliminary report. J Clin
Psychopharmacol. 2007;1:9 –12.
3 3 . S m e l s o nD ,K a l m a nD ,L o s o n c z yM ,K l i n eA ,S a m b a m o o r t h iU ,H i l lL ,
et al. A brief treatment engagement intervention for individuals with
co-occurring mental illness and su bstance use disorders: results of a
randomized clinical trial. Co mmunity Ment Health J. 2012;1 –6.
34. Smelson D, Kline A, Kuhn J, Rodrigues S, O ’Connor K, Fisher W, et al.
Wraparound treatment engagement intervention for homeless veterans
with co-occurring disorders. Psychol Serv. 2013;10(2):161 –7.
35. Fetterman D, Wandersman A. Empowerment evaluation principles in
practice. New York: Guilford Press; 2005.
36. Bandura A. Health promotion by social cognitive means. Health Educ Behav.
2004;31(2):143.
37. Fishbein M, Ajzen I. Attitudes towards objects as predictors of single and
multiple behavioral criteria. Psychol Rev. 1974;81(1):59 –74.
38. Durlak J, DuPre E. Implementation matters: a review of research on the
influence of implementation on program outcomes and the factors
affecting implementation. Am J Community Psychol. 2008;41(3):327 –50.
39. Acosta J, Chinman M, Ebener P, Malone P, Paddock S, Phillips A, et al. An
intervention to improve program implementation: findings from a two-year
cluster randomized trial of assets-getting to outcomes. Implement Sci.
2013;8:87.
40. Chinman M, Acosta J, Ebener P, Burkhart Q, Clifford M, Corsello M, et al.
Intervening with practitioners to improve the quality of prevention: one
year findings from a randomized controlled trial of the assets-getting to
outcomes intervention. J Prim Prev. 2010;34:173 –91. PMC3703481.
41. Chinman M, Tremain B, Imm P, Wandersman A. Strengthening prevention
performance using technology: a formative evaluation of interactive Getting
To OutcomesTM. Am J Orthopsychiatr. 2009;79:469 –81. PMC2859836.
42. Kitson A, Harvey G, McCormack B. Enabling the implementation of evidence
based practice: a conceptual framework. Qual Health Care.
1998;7:149 –58.
43. Rycroft-Malone J, Harvey G, Seers K, Kitson A, McCormack B, Titchen A. An
exploration of the factors that influence the implementation of evidence
into practice. J Clin Nurs. 2002;13:913 –24.44. Hannah G, McCarthy S, Chinman M. Getting to outcomes in services for
homeless veterans: 10 steps for achieving results-based accountability.
Philadelphia, PA: National Center on Homelessness Among Veterans; 2010.
45. Lesesne C, Lewis K, White C, Greem D, Duffy J, Wandersman A. Promoting
science-based approaches to teen p regnancy prevention: proactively
engaging the three systems of the in teractive systems framework. Am
J Community Psychol. 2008;41:379 –92.
46. McLellan A, Kushner H, Metzger D, Peters R. The fifth edition of the
Addiction Severity Index. J Subst Abuse Treat. 1992;9(3):199 –213.
47. Jones S, Thornicroft G, Coffey M, Dunn G. A brief mental health outcome
scale-reliability and validity of the Global Assessment of Functioning (GAF).
BR J Psyciatry. 1995;166(5):654 –9.
48. Russell F, Glasgow RE, Thomas M, Vogt TM, Shawn M, Boles SM, et al. Am
J Pub Health. 1999;89:1322 –7.
49. Faul F, Erdfelder E, Lang AG, Buchner A. G*Power 3: a flexible statistical
power analysis program for the social, behavioral, and biomedical sciences.
Behav Res Methods. 2007;39:175 –91.
50. Hox J. Multilevel analysis: techniques and application. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum; 2002.
51. Cohen J. Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences. 2nd ed.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates; 1988.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submitSmelson et al. Implementation Science  (2015) 10:79 Page 10 of 10
