Introduction to the Special Section on the Future of Health Psychology
Timothy W. Smith
University of UtahJerry Suls
University of Iowa
Following25yearsoflandmarkprogress,healthpsychologyfacesevengreaterchangeintheforeseeable
future.Evolvingpatternsofhealthandillnessanddevelopmentsinmedicineandrelatedfieldswillshapethe future of health psychology. The articles in this special section discuss these future issues in severalareas: the biopsychosocial model, changes in demographics, prevention, clinical health psychologyinterventions, health care financing, and new technologies. In every case, the future holds a variety ofimportant challenges and opportunities in research, practice, training, and policy.
Key words: health psychology, biopsychosocial model, training, interventions, diversity
The Division of Health Psychology (38) of the American Psy-
chological Association (APA) was founded 25 years ago. At the
time, leading scholars and practitioners from a variety of areaswithin psychology outlined a common vision of the potentialcontribution of psychological research and practice to understand-ing and promoting physical health (Wallston, 1997). Two yearsago, the Council of Representatives of APA voted to expand the
organization’smissionstatement,anditnowincludestheadvance-
ment of psychology as a “means for promoting health, education,and human welfare” (APA, 2004). For the founders of healthpsychology and those who later found a home there, this recentevent acknowledged the tremendous progress in the field’s briefhistory and validated a once revolutionary idea.
In many ways, the founders’ vision has been realized. The last
25 years have provided compelling and growing evidence of theimportance of application of psychological science and practice toissues of physical health. Developments in medical research rang-ing from growth in public and private funding for behavioralstudies, to establishment of the Office of Behavioral and SocialSciences Research at the National Institutes of Health, to theregular publication of behavioral studies in premier medical jour-nals illustrate the impact of this progress outside psychology. Therecent change in the APA mission statement provides a succinctsummary of the impact of this progress within psychology. Yet,everyone working in health psychology clearly recognizes the vastwork remaining and the ever increasing opportunities.
This moment of undeniable accomplishment and continuing
challenge provides an ideal occasion for considering the future ofhealth psychology—the focus of the six articles in this specialsection. At a time when so much progress has been made and theparent field has explicitly endorsed our original and previouslyunique mission as its own, where do health psychologists go from
here? If they do not elect to simply declare success and hold aclosing celebration or final victory party, what developments and
challenges will shape the next era in health psychology?
TheoriginofthesearticleswastheFutureofHealthPsychology
Conference, initiated by Division 38 and held in Pittsburgh, Penn-
sylvania, in March 2000.
1The conference included six working
groups, created by the original conference steering committee:
evolution of the biopsychosocial model, advances in medicine and
medical technology, changes in population demographics, health
care economics and the health psychology marketplace, preven-tion, and clinical health psychology interventions. Representativesof each of these working groups were invited to base an article onthe Pittsburgh proceedings and to update that conference report
with additional relevant information, perspectives, and develop-ments—including the field’s 25-year anniversary and the changein the APA mission statement. Recognizing that a changing fieldraised questions about the Division of Health Psychology’s ownorganizational mission, the Executive Committee of Division 38held a long-range planning meeting in the winter of 2002. Given
their role as the organizers of that meeting, Division 38 PresidentsJames Blumenthal and Francis Keefe were also invited to com-ment on the collected articles (Keefe & Blumenthal, 2004).
We believe the articles and commentary provide a thoughtful
reviewofwhatliesaheadinthefield’sforeseeablefuture,althoughit is clearly impossible to predict the next 25 years. Althoughcelebrations of progress in health psychology may indeed be in
order,closingupshopisnotanoption,asthereissimplytoomuchimportant work under way. The authors identify critical issues thatwill shape the evolving agenda in research, application, training,and policy. In what follows here, we note some of the themes that
1The Future of Health Psychology Conference was initiated by Ken
Wallston during his presidency of Division 38 and occurred during the
presidency of Jan Kiecolt-Glaser. The conference steering committee con-
sisted of Cynthia Belar, Martita Lopez, Nathan Perry, Pat Saab, TimothyW. Smith, and cochairs Andy Baum and Perry Nicassio. Andy Baum andthe Pittsburgh Cancer Center provided generous support, coordination, andlocal arrangements for the conference.Timothy W. Smith, Department of Psychology, University of Utah;
Jerry Suls, Department of Psychology, University of Iowa.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Timothy
W. Smith, Department of Psychology, University of Utah, 390 South 1530East, Room 502, Salt Lake City, UT 84112. E-mail: tim.smith@psych.utah.eduHealth Psychology Copyright 2004 by the American Psychological Association, Inc.
2004, Vol. 23, No. 2, 115–118 0278-6133/04/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0278-6133.23.2.115
115
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
emerged across several of the articles and in related recent
developments.
Maintaining and Enhancing Scientific Foundations:
Basic and Applied
From the outset, health psychology has involved both basic and
applied psychological science (Matarazzo, 1979). Initially, theo-ries and methods from other basic areas of psychology were usedto address issues in physical health, and assessments and interven-tions from other areas were applied and studied in health contexts.Avarietyofdevelopmentsinbiomedicalscience(e.g.,advancesinmedical imaging, molecular genetics) and psychological science
(e.g., ambulatory monitoring with experience sampling) have pro-
vided new and better opportunities to address long-standing basicquestionsinhealthpsychologyinmorecompellingways(seeSaabet al., 2004).
At the same time, applied science in health psychology has
matured sufficiently to support the field ’s claim that psychosocial
assessments and interventions are valuable additions to traditionalhealth care (Smith, Kendall, & Keefe, 2002; also see Nicassio,Meyerowitz, & Kerns, 2004; Smith, Orleans, & Jenkins, 2004).This comes at a unique moment in the history of health care.Rising costs and a growing emphasis on evidence-based medicalpractice create an opportunity for health psychology interventionsto compete with traditional medical approaches on a level playingfield. This new and possibly more fair arena comprises establishedempiricalmethodsforevaluatinginterventions(Kendall,Flannery-Schroeder, & Ford, 1999), comprehensive assessments of healthoutcomes (Kaplan, 1994), and consideration of associated costs(Kaplan & Groessl, 2002). This opportunity increases the impor-tance of methodologically sophisticated intervention outcomestudiesandrelatedmethodologicalissues,suchasevaluationoftheclinicalsignificanceofinterventioneffects(Kendall,1999)andtherelation of such effects to the cost of producing them (Kaplan &Groessl, 2002).
Even though randomized controlled trials and other research
designs demonstrating the benefits of health psychology interven-tions are essential in this current context, the growing emphasis inapplied research on treatment efficacy and effectiveness also pro-vides new opportunities for basic research. For example, theseinterventions are often based on theories tested primarily throughobservational research. Intervention studies provide rare opportu-nities for experimental tests of such theories, but only if theoutcome research is designed in such a way as to permit tests ofmediational or mechanism hypotheses (Smith, 2003a).
However, the primary focus of controlled intervention trials is
the difference between treatments (or between treatments andcontrol conditions). At least in psychotherapy research in mentalhealth settings, specific treatments account for a small proportionof change over the course of treatment. Other factors (e.g., thera-pistcharacteristics,therapyalliance)accountforalargerportionofoutcome variance (Lambert & Barley, 2002). The current incen-tives to produce evidence of the value of health psychology treat-ments should not lead researchers to forgo tests of embeddedconceptual questions about change mechanisms and determinantsof change that are not unique to specific treatments. That is, in aclimate of increased emphasis on evidence of practical interven-tioneffects,continuingattentiontorelatedbasicresearchquestionscan produce equally important knowledge about mechanisms un-
derlyingtreatmentoutcomeandgeneralprinciplesofchange.Suchbasic research can shape the evolving intervention research andpracticeinultimatelyhighlyusefulandpracticalways.Evenasthefieldmaturestothepointwhereagrowingemphasisonapplicationis clearly warranted, the reciprocal synergy between basic andapplied science in health psychology that has served the field sowell for 25 years should not be shortchanged in the future.
Moving Targets
Much has changed since the formal beginnings of the field of
health psychology. In addition to the accumulation of an impres-sive body of research and the dramatic growth in related clinicalservices and other applications, the focus of health psychologists ’
work is changing. Much of this change reflects changes in popu-lation demographics and associated changes in patterns of health(Siegler, Bastian, Steffens, Bosworth, & Costa, 2002; Whitfield,
Weidner, Clark, & Anderson, 2002; Yali & Revenson, 2004). In
the United States, the population is rapidly becoming more ethni-cally diverse and older. As a result, health psychology mustcontinue to develop and refine conceptual models, research meth-ods,andapplicationresourcesthataresensitivetothesepotentiallyinfluential contextual variations in several domains: sources ofmorbidity and mortality, behavioral risks for and consequences ofthose health conditions, modifiable determinants of their psycho-social risks and effects, and related interventions. Meeting thischallenge will require additional types of collaborations (e.g., lifespan developmental psychologists, experts in ethnically and cul-turally appropriate research methods) as well as an increasedemphasis on the training of “contextually competent ”(Yali &
Revenson, 2004) researchers and practitioners.
Rapid advances in communication technologies also present
new opportunities in the delivery of health psychology interven-tions (Saab et al., 2004). By increasing the reach of interventions,such technologies could lead to larger population-based effects(Glasgow, Vogt, & Boles, 1999). Here too, however, new collab-orations and new components of training will be necessary to takeadvantage of these opportunities. This emerging emphasis onhealth behavior change at the level of larger groups illustrates ashift in the historical emphasis within the biopsychosocial model(Engel, 1977) that has been so influential in health psychology(Suls & Rothman, 2004). Early in its history, the field emphasizedconnections between psychological processes and levels of anal-ysis at the microlevel, such as those involved in the pathophysi-ologyofdiseaseandmedicaltreatments.Thatis,connectionshavebeen emphasized from psychological processes to those down inthe multiple, hierarchically arranged systems in the biopsychoso-cial model. Although this direction of transdisciplinary researchwill continue to grow, increased attention will likely be devoted totransdisciplinary research and application at the macrolevel —that
is, up the hierarchy of systems to organizational, cultural, andeconomic levels of analysis. This is because the evidence of theimportance of broader cultural and socioeconomic influences onhealth continues to mount and opportunities continually emergefor more population-based interventions (Smith et al., 2004).Again, such trends will require new partnerships in research andapplication as well as new emphases within health psychologytraining programs.116 SPECIAL SECTION: INTRODUCTION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Giving Health Psychology Away —But Still Getting Paid
One of the overarching future challenges illustrated in the arti-
cles in this special section involves education. As noted above, the
future trends will require additions to current training programsand the expansion of training models. Current training curriculaare already extensive, given all of the knowledge required foroptimal functioning as a health psychologist. Adding to this al-ready demanding course of study will force difficult choices for
those charged with designing, implementing, and evaluating train-
ingprograms.Here,theappropriateconcernwithaccreditationandother processes intended to insure public safety could come intoconflict with the need for the flexibility required to take advantageof a rapidly changing set of opportunities and challenges.
Given the ever changing nature of health psychology and the
interfacing fields of medicine, public health, and health care eco-nomics, additional resources in continuing education will be nec-essary. Developments within health psychology and related fieldswill be critical influences on research and practice, and healthpsychologists must make sure the information is sufficiently avail-able to other health psychologists throughout their careers. This isespecially true if psychologists originally trained outside of healthpsychology programs follow the shift in the larger field that wasacknowledged by the recent APA mission statement revision.Experts have already suggested valuable frameworks for self-guided continuing education as psychologists expand their priortraditionalpracticestoincludehealthpopulationsandissues(Belaret al., 2001), but the feasibility and success of such approachesshould be evaluated carefully rather than assumed (Smith, 2003b).
Beyond psychologists in their initial and continuing education,
there are other audiences to whom health psychology must begiven away more effectively. A growing presence of health psy-chologycontentintheinitialandcontinuingeducationcurriculainrelated fields (e.g., medicine, public health, health education)would promote awareness of the common mission and potentialbenefits of increased collaboration in research and health care.Public education can also be a useful vehicle for growing thedemandforhealthpsychologyservicesamongthosenavigatingthecomplex marketplace in health care financing (Tovian, 2004).Finally, education of policymakers could lead to increased man-dated support for health psychology research, training, and ser-vices. The troubling growth in health care expenditures was animportant part of the initial interest in the nascent field 25 yearsago(Matarazzo,1980),anditwillcontinuetobeadrivingforceinthe future. These rising costs will make efforts to mandate supportfor health psychology more difficult but also more essential forcontinued progress in the field. To secure a robust future for theapplication of health psychology, coverage of such services inhealth care financing must be expanded (Tovian, 2004).
A Look Forward and an Appreciative Look Back
On the occasion of a 25-year anniversary with so many accom-
plishments to celebrate, one might expect that a review of the
field’s progress and future would provide the leisurely pleasure of
watching a small town parade on Independence Day. The follow-ing articles in this special section, however, illustrate the rapidexpansionandchangingopportunitiesandchallengesofadynamicfield that is even more relevant now than when it began. Hence, areview of the progress and consideration of the future feel more
like watching runways at a major airport during rush hour or eventhe running of the bulls.
This is an excellent occasion to congratulate the founders of
Division 38 for their foresight, pioneering spirit, and ultimatesuccess. It is also an excellent time to remind those currentlyinvolved in the field of the importance of their efforts and thecomplexity of what lies ahead. Finally, it is a superb time to invitean ever widening range of prospective students, colleagues, andcollaborators to join in on a demanding and rewarding future.
References
American Psychological Association. (2004). Bylaws of the American
Psychological Association, Article I, 1. Retrieved January 8, 2004, from
http://www.apa.org/governance/bylaws/art1.html
Belar, C. D., Brown, R. A., Hersch, L. E., Hornyak, L. M., Rozensky,
R. H., Sheridan, E. P., et al. (2001). Self-assessment in clinical health
psychology: A model for the ethical expansion of practice. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 32, 135–141.
Engel, G. (1977, April 8). The need for a new medical model: A challenge
for biomedicine. Science, 196, 129–136.
Glasgow, R. E., Vogt, T. M., & Boles, S. M. (1999). Evaluating the public
health impact of health promotion interventions: The RE-AIM frame-work.American Journal of Public Health, 89, 1322–1327.
Kaplan, R. M. (1994). The Ziggy theorem: Toward an outcomes-focused
health psychology. Health Psychology, 13, 451–460.
Kaplan, R. M., & Groessl, E. J. (2002). Applications of cost-effectiveness
methodologies in behavioral medicine. Journal of Consulting and Clin-
ical Psychology, 70, 482–493.
Keefe,F.J.,&Blumenthal,J.A.(2004).Healthpsychology:Whatwillthe
future bring? Health Psychology, 23, 156–157.
Kendall, P. C. (1999). Clinical significance. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 283–284.
Kendall, P. C., Flannery-Schroeder, E. C., & Ford, J. D. (1999). Therapy
outcome research methods. In P. C. Kendall, J. N. Butcher, & G. N.Holmbeck (Eds.), Handbook of research methods in clinical psychology
(2nd ed., pp. 330 –363). New York: Wiley.
Lambert, M. J., & Barley, D. E. (2002). Research summary on the thera-
peutic relationship and psychotherapy outcome. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist contributions andresponsiveness to patients (pp. 17–32). Oxford, England: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Matarazzo, J. D. (1979). President ’s column. The Health Psychologist,
1(1), 1.
Matarazzo, J. D. (1980). Behavioral health and behavioral medicine: Fron-
tiers for a new health psychology. American Psychologist, 35, 807–817.
Nicassio, P. M., Meyerowitz, B. E., & Kerns, R. D. (2004). The future of
health psychology interventions. Health Psychology, 23, 132–137.
Saab, P. G., McCalla, J. R., Coons, H. L., Christensen, A. J., Kaplan, R.,
Johnson, S. B., et al. (2004). Technological and medical advances:Implications for health psychology. Health Psychology, 23, 142–146.
Siegler, I. C., Bastian, L. A., Steffens, D. C., Bosworth, H. B., & Costa,
P. T. (2002). Behavioral medicine and aging. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 70, 843–851.
Smith, T. W. (2003a). Health psychology. In I. B. Weiner (Series Ed.) &
J. A. Schinka & W. F. Velicer (Vol. Eds.), Handbook of psychology:
Vol. 2. Research methods in psychology (pp. 241–270). Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley.
Smith, T. W. (2003b). On being careful when you get what you wish for:
Comment on Belar et al. (2001). Prevention & Treatment, 6, 26.117 SPECIAL SECTION: INTRODUCTION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
Smith, T. W., Kendall, P. C., & Keefe, F. (2002). Behavioral medicine and
clinicalhealthpsychology:Introductiontothespecialissue,aviewfrom
the decade of behavior. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology,
70,459–462.
Smith, T. W., Orleans, C. T., & Jenkins, C. D. (2004). Prevention and
health promotion: Decades of progress, new challenges, and an emerg-ing agenda. Health Psychology, 23, 126–131.
Suls, J., & Rothman, A. (2004). Evolution of the biopsychosocial model:
Prospects and challenges for health psychology. Health Psychology, 23,
119–125.
Tovian, S. M. (2004). Health services and health care economics: The
health psychology marketplace. Health Psychology, 23, 138–141.Wallston, K. A. (1997). A history of Division 38 (Health Psychology):
Healthy, wealthy, and Weiss. In D. A. Dewsbury (Ed.), Unification
through divisions: Histories of the divisions of the American Psycho-logical Association (pp. 239–267). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.
Whitfield, K. E., Weidner, G., Clark, R., & Anderson, N. B. (2002).
Sociodemographic diversity and behavioral medicine. Journal of Con-
sulting and Clinical Psychology, 70, 463–481.
Yali, A. M., & Revenson, T. A. (2004). How changes in population
demographics will impact health psychology: Incorporating a broadernotion of cultural competence into the field. Health Psychology 23,
147–155.
Call for Papers on Childhood Chronic Illness:
Reciprocal Impact on Parent and Child Relationships
Health Psychology is requesting empirical papers that focus on children or adolescents
with chronic illness. The focus of this special section is on the reciprocal impact between
parent and child. That is, papers must in some way address the effect of the family on thechild as well as the effect of the child on the family. Studies must present both family andchild outcomes. One of the major outcomes must represent either physical health or healthbehavior(e.g.,adherence).Parentalreportsofchildoutcomesarenotsufficient.Studiesthathave developed innovative methodologies to study these issues will be given priority.
Longitudinal studies are especially welcome. The deadline for submission is July 1, 2004.
All manuscripts will go through the standard peer-review process.
Some examples of topics that fit the theme of the special section are the following:
outcomes of family therapy interventions
studies of family interactions
studies that address the effcts of parent mental health on the child as well as
effects of child characteristics on the parent
studies that examine the effects of the illness on both children and families
studies that examine the parent –child relationship from both perspectives
studies that examine the effects of the marital relationship on the child as well asthe effects of the child on the marital relationship118 SPECIAL SECTION: INTRODUCTION
This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.
