Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: 1743-7199 (Print) 1743-7202 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Classification systems in behavioural science:
current systems and lessons from the natural,
medical and social sciences
Zoe Stavri & Susan Michie
To cite this article:  Zoe Stavri & Susan Michie (2012) Classification systems in behavioural
science: current systems and lessons from the natural, medical and social sciences, Health
Psychology Review, 6:1, 113-140, DOI: 10.1080/17437199.2011.641101
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2011.641101
Published online: 03 Jan 2012.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 847
View related articles 
Citing articles: 6 View citing articles 

Classiﬁcation systems in behavioural science: current systems and
lessons from the natural, medical and social sciences
Zoe Stavri and Susan Michie*
Department of Clinical, Educational and Health Psychology, University College London,
London, UK
(Received 22 October 2010; ﬁnal version received 12 September 2011 )
Background: Specifying individual behaviour change techniques (BCTs) is crucial
for better development and evaluation of behaviour change interventions.Classification of BCTs will help this process and can be informed by classification
systems in the natural, medical and social sciences. Method: A search of the
classification literature in the natural, medical and social sciences produced aframework within which to consider a systematic search of classification systemsof BCTs in the behaviour change literature. Results: Six distinct types of
classification system from other scientific disciplines were identified: nomencla-
tures, ordered sets, hierarchical, matrices, faceted and social categorisations. Eightclassification systems of BCTs were identified, none of which had a formal,hierarchical structure. Most were developed for specific behaviours, although one
was general. Discussion: Developing a hierarchical structure, similar to those used
in other scientific disciplines, would enable better communication and under-standing of BCTs and inform the development and evaluation of interventions.
Hierarchical structured classification systems contain many of the characteristics
most desirable in a classification of BCTs.
Keywords: classiﬁcation; taxonomy; behaviour change techniques; behavioural
interventions; behaviour change; behaviour
Introduction
Behaviour change interventions are widely used in promoting population health, by
preventing disease, managing illness and improving health care delivery . While thereare many examples of successful interventions, effects are variable and many haveonly modest effects (NICE, 2007). Developing a science and technology of behaviourchange requires replication, linking of interventions to theory (mechanisms of
action) and evidence synthesis (Michie, Johnston, Francis, Hardeman, & Eccles,
2008). These would benefit from a systematic approach to specifying interventioncharacteristics, including their content, that is, the component techniques with thepotential to bring about behaviour change. This is a starting point for assessing inwhat circumstances different types of intervention are likely to be effective.
While guidelines such as CONSORT (Moher, Schulz, & Altman, 2001) exist for
reporting details of interventions, they do not provide a method for specifying theircontent. There are a multitude of behaviour change techniques (BCTs) that aredelivered in a wide variety of combinations and with a wide variety of methods
*Corresponding author. Email: s.michie@ucl.ac.ukHealth Psychology Review
Vol. 6, No. 1, March 2012, 113 /C1140
ISSN 1743-7199 print/ISSN 1743-7202 online
#2012 Taylor & Francis
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2011.641101http://www.tandfonline.com
(‘modes of delivery ’) (see Abraham, Kelly, West, & Michie, 2009; Michie, Abraham,
Whittington, McAteer, & Gupta, 2009). A BCT is a specific (i.e., distinct from otherBCTs), irreducible (i.e., cannot be broken down further), component of anintervention designed to change behaviour. It is a putative active ingredient in anintervention, which can be used alone or in combination with other BCTs and itseffectiveness can be assessed. For example, motivational interviewing is nota BCT
as it is a cluster of BCTs used in combination. However, self-monitoring isa BCT as
it is distinct from other BCTs and irreducible /C1although it consists of two elements
(observing and recording), without either of these, it would cease to be self-monitoring.
Methods of specifying, defining and classifying BCTs have been developed;
examples are Abraham and Michie ’s (2008) list of 26 techniques for healthy eating
and physical activity, its subsequent development into 40 BCTs (Michie et al., 2011a)and Albarrac ı´n et al. ’s (2005) 10 techniques for promoting condom use. These are
best described as nomenclatures, lacking structure and with BCTs varying widely inscope and specificity. Attempts have been made at structuring nomenclatures ofBCTs, such as a classification of BCTs for road safety, which has a tree-like structure(Geller et al., 1990), a classification of BCTs for weight management whichcategorised according to mode of delivery and theoretical basis of the intervention(Hardeman, Griffin, Johnston, Kinmonth, & Wareham, 2000) and a classification ofBCTs for smoking cessation, which classified according to theoretical basis of theBCT (Michie, Churchill, & West, 2011). These few examples from behavioural
science have different structures and do not share a method of development, nor do
they draw on methods used from other scientific disciplines. Whilst this may not be aproblem, behavioural science is a young science and may benefit from drawing on theexperience and accumulated expertise within other, more established sciences. Theneed to optimise our methods becomes more acute as more investment is made inbasic and applied behavioural science, multidisciplinary research is increasing andlimitations are evident in current methods of synthesising evidence from studies ofheterogeneous interventions to change behaviour (e.g., NICE, 2007). This articlereports a structured review aimed at identifying and describing current classificationsystems of BCTs and evaluating them in the context of classification systems used inthe natural, medical and social sciences.
Classification is the process of grouping objects according to similarity. Although
the terms ‘taxonomy ’and ‘classification system (or scheme) ’are often used
interchangeably, the term ‘classification system ’is broader. While classification
systems can refer to any method of classifying or grouping items, taxonomies havetree-like structures reflecting their hierarchical nature. They are predictable and
logical (Broughton, 2004) and share a methodology for development (Bailey, 1994).
In the natural, medical and social sciences, there are six types of classification
system: nomenclatures, ordered sets, hierarchical, matrices, faceted and socialcategorisations (see Table 1).
A nomenclature is an unstructured system of terms, with classification dependent
on the precise meaning of the terms. This is illustrated within astronomy where Plutowas de-classified as a planet following the International Astronomical Union (IAU)adopted a definition of ‘planet ’as‘a celestial body which (1) is in orbit around the
Sun; (2) has sufficient mass so that it assumes hydrostatic equilibrium (i.e. it isround); (3) has cleared the neighbourhood around its orbit ’(IAU, 2008, 2009). Pluto114 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Table 1. Characteristics of classi ﬁcation systems from the natural, medical and social sciences.
Nomenclatures Ordered set Hierarchical Matrix FacetedSocial
categorisation
Examples Planets Musical scale,
Bloom ’s
taxonomyLinnaean taxonomy,
cladistic
classification; Libraryclassifications, ICD-
10Periodic table of
the chemical
elementsColon classification
(library); SNOMEDFolksonomy
Purpose of
classificationNecessary
starting point for
classificationDescribe the
relationship
between objects in
the setDescribe similarities
or differences
heuristically; enable
quick retrieval ofinformationAllow systematic
comparison of
properties of
objectsAddress the shortcomings
of traditional hierarchical
classification, classify an
object based on multiplecharacteristicssimultaneouslyAllow website
users to classify
content in their
own schema
Hierarchical
structureNo No Yes No Multiple hierarchies are
possibleNo
Prediction
possibleNo Y es Yes Y es No No
Method of
developmentConsensus Mathematical or
consensusMathematical or
consensusMathematical or
consensusConsensus Consensus
Multiple
classificationspermittedNo No No No Y es Y es
Basis of
classificationNone Mathematical
relationships,existing scientificknowledgeSimilarities and
differencesExisting scientific
knowledgeNone: pragmatic method of
classificationPersonal schema
of website users
Ability to
accommodatenew
discoveriesPoor: definitions
may changePoor: sets are
fixedGood Good Good: categories are
flexibleGoodHealth Psychology Review 115
failed to meet the third criterion, as it is located in the Kuiper Belt, an icy, dusty
region of the solar system. The decision was met with disagreement by the generalpublic, who had, since its discovery, culturally defined Pluto as a planet. The IAU
had indeed considered using a cultural definition of planets: an object is a planet if
enough people say it is. This was rejected as not being ‘meaningful ’(Eales, 2007),
although the meaning of ‘meaningful ’was not further elaborated.
An ordered set involves placing objects to be classified in a logical order, for
example, ascending size. Ordered set classification systems communicate informationabout the relationships between the classified objects. An example is the octave usedin Western music, a set of 12 evenly spaced tones in which the last tone has twice the
frequency of the first. Consonance ( ‘pleasingness ’) and dissonance of sound are
related to mathematical relationships between the sounds. Another example isBloom ’s Taxonomy (Bloom, 1956; cited in Bloom, 1994) of educational objectives
which are divided into three ‘domains ’: the cognitive, affective and psychomotor.
Within each of these domains are levels, ascending from the lowest level of processingthrough to the highest. For example, the cognitive domain consists of levels of
knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and evaluation (Bloom,
1956; cited in Kreitzer & Madaus, 1994). The levels differ only in complexity, i.e.,knowledge is necessary for comprehension to occur. Statistical tests of thisassumption have produced mixed results, generally showing support for the notionof a cumulative structure (as in a hierarchy, in which lower levels contain all thecharacteristics of higher levels), although the order produced may be different
(Kreitzer & Madaus, 1994). Investigations using cluster analysis and path analysis
methods have been met with mixed success. For example, ‘knowledge ’does not
appear to fit within the hierarchy. Likewise, path analysis suggests that the orders of‘analysis ’and ‘synthesis ’may be reversed. Krathwohl (1994) acknowledges the
taxonomy ’s mathematical shortcomings, namely the lack of conclusive support for
the nature and order of the levels of processing, but praises it as a heuristicframework which is useful in terms of both practical application and academic value.
While it may lack the predictive abilities of other classification systems, it is a helpful
practical tool for defining and classifying educational objectives and aidingexamination design.
Hierarchical classification involves organising objects into groups based on
similarity, using superordinate and subordinate categories. A hierarchy must meetfour criteria: inclusiveness (the top category must include all below it), relationalconsistency (the kind of relationship between each level of the hierarchy is the same),
inheritance (subordinate categories ‘inherit ’all of the attributes of the superordinate
categories) and mutual exclusivity (an entity can belong in only one place within thehierarchy) (Lambe, 2007). While simple lists have their value, when classifying a largeamount of objects, it is desirable to undertake data reduction by grouping itemstogether. A hierarchical taxonomy enables quick retrieval of relevant informationand communicates a large amount of descriptive information economically.
The most famous example of a hierarchical classification is Linnaeus ’s biological
classification system (Linnaeus, 1751), which uses the taxonomic ranks of Kingdom,Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus and Species to categorise animals and plants.Each level of the taxonomy reflects a greater degree of specificity; for example, at theKingdom level, objects are classified as animals or plants. Each has subcategories,116 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
which are further divided into subcategories, ending with the Species level, which is
the greatest level of specificity, the object itself.
In Linnaeus ’s time, groups were clustered subjectively. Later scientific develop-
ments led to the application of mathematical methods, known as ‘numerical
taxonomy ’. It has its roots in the biometric movement at the beginning of the
twentieth century, when statistical methods for analysing ‘distance ’between
categories were first developed (Sneath & Sokal, 1973). ‘Distance ’refers to objects
that are highly different on a number of dimensions, while ‘similarity ’refers to those
which are ‘closer ’. The method used is typically cluster analysis, in which groups are
formed by assessing similarity of objects on as many dimensions as possible, and thenlinking the most similar objects together into groups. By the 1960s, this had becomepopular, and today all biological classification systems use statistical analysis (Sneath& Sokal, 1973) known as numerical taxonomy. Numerical taxonomy has a clearlyspecified methodology, with the aim of logical consistency and explicit rules fordealing with problems such as overlapping clusters (Jardine & Sibson, 1971).
An alternative hierarchical classification to that based on similarities and
differences has been developed to reflect new scientific knowledge following thetheory of evolution which changed the conceptualisation of animals and plants fromstatic entities to entities which have changed over millions of years (Simpson, 1961).This evolutionary approach involves classifying biological entities by ‘clades ’, which
represent alltheir common ancestry. Advocates of ‘cladistics ’argue that evolutionary
descent and common ancestry are the most important factors in classifyingbiological entities and that the ranks used in traditional Linnaean taxonomy are
arbitrary and restrictive (Cantino, 2000).
Technology has played an important role in helping to classify entities. For
example, DNA sequencing provides an alternative to the search for physical,visible similarities between species and DNA bar coding can verify that entities areseparate species (Seberg & Petersen, 2007). Furthermore, the cladistic approach ismore flexible in accommodating new discoveries, as there is an inherent assumptionthat the shape of the ‘tree’will change with more information (Hennig, 1975).
Evolutionary classification allows predictions to be made: it can identify a missingancestor of a living species and can give information about what a missing fossilwould look like (Simpson, 1961).
Examples of hierarchical classification systems in other disciplines are library and
medical classifications. The Library of Congress Classification and the DeweyDecimal Classification (Broughton, 2004) are not statistically based, but are rootedin logical theory and represent consensually accepted pragmatic schemes (Richmond,1965; cited in Painter, 1972). The World Health Organisation ’s International
Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) is organised into 22 heterogeneous higher-order
categories, ‘chapters ’. Some refer to parts of the body (e.g., ‘diseases of the nervous
system ’), others to mode of infection (e.g., ’certain infectious and parasitic diseases ’)
and others, for example ‘risk factors ’do not refer to diseases per se . Items within
chapters are also diverse (MacMahon & Trichopoulos, 1996). Despite this, ICD-10codes are very useful to doctors, having been built using consensus processes andreviewed at international conferences to ensure a usable classification system (WorldHealth Organisation, 2008).
Matrix classification involves classifying objects according to two dimensions and
tabulating the results, the Periodic Table of the chemical elements being the mostHealth Psychology Review 117
famous example developed in 1869 by Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev. Taking a
top-down approach, the Periodic Table uses atomic weight and chemical similaritiesto place chemical elements into a grid. This classification was based on the scientifictheory of its time, the ‘law of octaves ’, which stated that if one ordered the elements in
descending order of atomic weight, the properties of the eighth element resembled
that of the first (Puddephatt & Monaghan, 1986). At the time of its development,there were ‘gaps ’in the Table. Using the Table, Mendeleev was able to accurately
predict the properties of scandium, germanium and gallium before their discovery(Bensaude-Vincent & Stengers, 1996), illustrating the value of matrix classificationsystems for predicting the properties of missing values.
Faceted classification classifies objects according to a number of unrelated
dimensions or ‘facets ’. An example is The Systemised Nomenclature of Medicine
(SNOMED) which was developed using consensus methods and classifies concepts
related to health according to a range of characteristics including clinical findings,body structures and social context (International Health Terminology StandardsDevelopment Organisation, 2008). Faceted classification may have found its nichewith the advent of the Internet; it has become a useful tool for websites where userscan search for items based on facets such as price, size, type, make and so on (Lambe,2007).
Social categorisation takes a bottom-up approach to assign keywords to content,
from which groupings arise, with users constructing the classification system. This
has flourished with the age of the Internet and the ‘Web 2.0 ’movement towards user-
generated content. ‘Folksonomies ’or‘tagsonomies ’(Lambe, 2007) are created by
users uploading photographs or blog posts and ‘tagging ’content using publicly-
viewable keywords (Mathes, 2004). Consensus on tagging items has been found toconform closely to official guidelines for constructing controlled vocabularies: thetags are often nouns and tend to avoid jargon, similar to public library catalogues(Spiteri, 2007). Since user-tagging appears to produce classification systems similar
to a library catalogue, it may prove to be an effective way of organising and
categorising. However, they are not objectively constructed, since user tags reflectpersonal opinion (Peterson, 2006). Folksonomies are sets of categories or nomen-clatures rather than taxonomies as, although the labels are clear and well defined, thestructure is ‘flat’or non-hierarchical and does not describe relationships between
categories (Mathes, 2004).
The current structured review seeks to identify and describe current classification
systems of BCTs and evaluate them in the context of classification systems used in
the natural, medical and social sciences.
Method
The electronic databases PsychINFO, MEDLINE and EMBASE were searched with
terms ‘classification ’OR ‘taxonomy ’AND ‘behavio* change ’OR ‘behavio*
intervention ’OR ‘behavio* change intervention ’in October 2009. These broad
search terms were used to identify as many relevant classification systems as possible.
References cited by the identified articles were searched. There was no limit on date
of publication. Classification systems of constructs other than BCTs were excluded,as were commentaries and non-English publications. No relevant dissertations wereidentified.118 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Information about the purpose of the classification system, the number of BCTs,
the structure of the classification system, definitions of the BCTs, reliability and theuse of psychological theory was extracted and classification systems were compared
on these dimensions. Data extraction was conducted by Zoe Stavri, and checked by
Susan Michie.
Results
Inclusion and exclusion of articles is summarised in Figure 1. Of 276 articles
identified, 60 were duplicates, 176 articles did not present a classification system, 28presented classification systems, though not of BCTs, and five were commentaries.An example of an article which did not present a classification system would be one
which tested a model of behaviour and classified intervention participants according
to stage of change using the Transtheoretical Model (Prochaska & Velicer, 1997). Anexample of an article presenting a classification system, though not of BCTs, wouldbe one which classified behaviours, or one which classified general types of
intervention without elaborating specific BCTs.
This left seven articles that met the inclusion criteria (Abraham & Michie, 2008;
Dywer, Leeming, Cobern, & Porter, 1993; Geller et al., 1990; Hardeman, Griffin,Johnston, Kinmonth, & Wareham, 2000; Leeman, Baernholdt, & Sandelowski, 2007;McLean, Griffin, Toney, & Hardeman, 2003; Michie, Johnston, Hardeman, Francis,& Eccles, 2008). Two additional articles (Albarrac ı´n et al., 2005; Webb & Sheeran,
2006) were located by searching the references of these articles and a further two
(Embry & Biglan, 2008; Michie et al., 2011b) were identified following consultationwith experts in behaviour change, giving a total of 11 classification systems. Eight aresummarised in Table 2. Dwyer et al. (1993), McLean et al. (2003) and Webb and
Sheeran (2006) are omitted as they constitute applications of classification systems
already included in this review.
276 articles
identified
269 excluded: 60 duplicates,176 not classificationsystems, 28 not relating to BCTs, 5 commentaries
Reference searching of 7 relevant articles: 2articles added 
Expert consultation: 2articles added 
11 articles total
Figure 1. Inclusion of classi ﬁcation systems of BCTs.Health Psychology Review 119
Table 2. Characteristics of classi ﬁcation systems of BCTs.
AuthorsGeller et al.
(1990)Hardeman
et al. (2000)Abraham and Michie
(2008) (40-item
extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008)Michie
et al.
(2008)Michie et al.
(2011b)
Behaviour Injury control Prevention
of weightgainHealthy eating and
physical activityHIV prevention Implementing
change in healthcarepracticeGeneral ‘behavioural
influence ’Smoking
cessation
Definition of a
BCTIntervention
strategiesBehaviour
changemethodsIntervention content ‘Intervention
strategies that can beexpected to change
behaviour ’Methods for change,
targeted at careproviders‘Indivisible procedure
shown throughexperimental
evaluation to produce
reliable effects onbehaviour ’;‘active
ingredients ’in
prevention or
behaviour changeprograms.‘Systematic
proceduresdesigned to
change
behaviour ’
Reason for
developmentHeuristic
framework for
categorising andevaluating BCTs.Characterise
intervention
methodsDevelop a
standardised
vocabulary ofintervention
components, identify
BCTs associated withinterventioneffectiveness, facilitate
meta-analytical theory
testing, improvefidelity of interventionreplications and
applicationsCompare different
intervention strategiesAid reporting of
what is done; provide
a framework toguide selection and
use of BCTsProvide a nomenclature
of BCTsIdentify
competences
necessary fordelivering
individual
and groupbehaviouralsupport for
smoking
cessation120 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Table 2 ( Continued )
AuthorsGeller et al.
(1990)Hardeman
et al. (2000)Abraham and Michie
(2008) (40-item
extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008)Michie
et al.
(2008)Michie et al.
(2011b)
Characteristics
used for
classificationTechniques Techniques,
underlying
model,modes ofdelivery
(further
divided intogroup,materials
and expert
behaviourchange)Techniques Techniques,
participant
characteristics (ethnicdescent and sexualorientation), settingTechniques Techniques Techniques
Structure 2 levels None None 1 level 1 level 1 level None 1 level
Reliability /C1/C1 85/C1100% agreement Kappa 0.9 /C11 90% agreement /C1/C1 90%
agreement
Theoretical
basis/linksBased on
antecedent-
behaviour-consequence
modelClassifies
underlying
model aswell as BCTs
usedTheory linked to
mechanisms of
behaviour which BCTstargetItems drawn from
theories of behaviour
changeTechniques grouped by
mechanism of action.
Mix of theories.Functions of
the BCTs
used forgroups
Method of
developmentReview of the
behaviouralscience literature,
particularly
appliedbehaviouranalysis.Consultation
of textbooksand experts
in the field.Inductive generation
by authors fromjournal descriptions of
interventions.Techniques implied
by health behaviourchange theories were
selected and
organised into passiveand active strategies.Modification of an
existing taxonomy,with the addition of
theory.Series of meetings of
scientific and policyexpertsBCTs
identifiedfrom stop
smoking
servicemanuals.Health Psychology Review 121
Table 2 ( Continued )
AuthorsGeller et al.
(1990)Hardeman
et al. (2000)Abraham and Michie
(2008) (40-item
extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008)Michie
et al.
(2008)Michie et al.
(2011b)
BCT categories
and numbersCommunication/
education: n /C306
Activators:n/C3012
Consequences:
n/C306n/C3019 n/C3040 Passive strategies:
n/C305
Active strategies:n/C305Increase
coordination tomanageinterdependence
(Contingency
Theory): n/C304
Raise awareness ofpractice change
(Diffusion of
Innovations): n/C302
Persuade viainterpersonal
channels/norms
(Diffusion ofInnovations/ Theory
of Planned
Behaviour): n /C303
Persuade byreinforcing belief
that behaviour will
lead to desirableresults (TPB): n/C303
Increase behavioural
control (TPB): n/C303Kernels altering
consequences ofbehaviour: n/C3027
Kernels affecting
behaviours primarily
via antecedents: n/C308
Kernels affectingbehaviours primarily
via relational frames:
n/C306
Kernels affectingbehaviours primarily
via physiology: n/C309Addressing
motivation:n/C3012
Maximising
self-
regulatorycapacity:n/C3014
Adjuvant
activities:n/C305
General
aspects of
theinteraction:
n/C3022122 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Purpose of the classification systems
All of the classification systems were developed for the purpose of systematically
reviewing behaviour change interventions, covering a diverse range of behaviours.Geller et al. ’s classification, developed for injury control and road safety, has been
applied to environmental protection behaviours (Dwyer et al., 1993). Hardemanet al. ’s (2000) classification was used for prevention of weight gain, and has been
applied to weight loss interventions (McLean et al., 2003). Abraham and Michie ’s
(2008) classification was developed to review diet and physical activity interventions.
Albarracin et al. ’s (2005) classification was developed for HIV prevention interven-
tions, specifically condom use. Leeman et al. ’s (2007) classification was of
interventions targeting health care workers. Michie et al. ’s (2008) classification was
not restricted to specific behaviours and included any technique that could changebehaviour. Webb and Sheeran (2006) applied Hardeman et al. ’s (2000) classification
to investigate the extent to which changing behavioural intention led to behaviourchange.
Definitions of BCTs
Abraham and Michie (2008), Embry and Biglan (2008) and Geller et al. (1990) give
definitions of BCTs, Michie et al. (2008) give definitions of some, but not all of theBCTs and Albarracin et al. (2005) give examples of how the BCTs may be applied.The remaining classification systems do not present BCT definitions.
Number of BCTs
There is considerable variation amongst the classification systems in the number of
BCTs included, ranging from 19 to 137, reflecting heterogeneity in their specificityand scope (see Table 2 and Supplementary table). The smaller classification systems
are targeted towards specific behaviours while the larger ones are general. The 40-
item extension of Abraham and Michie ’s (2008) system has increased its level of
specificity: for example, ‘provide contingent rewards ’has been broken down into
‘provide rewards contingent on successful behaviour ’and ‘provide rewards con-
tingent on effort or progress towards the behaviour ’. It has also improved the clarity
of technique labels and definitions. The 40-item version is therefore presented inTable 2 as it represents the most up-to-date version of this classification system. Thelargest, Michie et al. ’s (2008) classification, has 137 BCTs reflecting its broad basis,
drawing from textbooks relating to behaviour change and ‘brainstorming ’by
researchers and clinicians from clinical, health and social psychology.
Structure
Four classifications have one level of hierarchy. Two of these are not true hierarchies,
since they do not demonstrate relational consistency, where the kind of relationship
between each level of the hierarchy is the same (Lambe, 2007). These are Albarracinet al. ’s‘passive ’vs‘active ’groups and Leeman et al. ’s five categories (increase co-
ordination to manage interdependence, raise awareness of practice change, persuadevia interpersonal channels/norms, persuade by reinforcing belief that behaviour willHealth Psychology Review 123
lead to desirable results and increase behavioural control). Michie et al. ’s (2011b)
structure has four categories (address motivation, maximise self-regulatory capacity,promote adjuvant activities and general aspects of the interaction), as does Embry
and Biglan ’s: altering consequences of behaviour, affecting behaviour primarily via
antecedents, affecting behaviour primarily via relational frames and affectingbehaviour primarily via physiology. Geller et al. (1990) has a two-level hierarchy
with three higher-order categories: communication/education interventions, activa-
tors and consequences. Both communication/education and activators are said tooccur before the behaviour, as preventive techniques, while consequences occur after.Confusingly, in describing the categories, both communication/education and
activators are described as ‘activators ’. These each have two subordinate categories:
communication/education is divided into active or passive interventions, whileactivators and consequences are both divided into individual or group interventions(see Table 2).
Faceted classification was applied by two of these classification systems to
behaviour change interventions as opposed to the component BCTs (Albarracin
et al., 2005; Hardeman et al., 2000). This allows classification of additionalinformation such as the mode of delivery and the context in which the BCT isimplemented and can facilitate the systematic investigation of interactions between
different intervention characteristics.
Use of psychological theory
All classification systems use theory to some degree. Geller et al. (1990) based their
classification on the antecedent-behaviour-consequence model. Hardeman et al.(2000) did not explicitly link their BCTs to theory, but classified underlying theory ofthe interventions from which the BCTs were derived. Albarrac ı´n et al. (2005)
identified BCTs implied by theories of behaviour change. Abraham and Michie
(2008) proposed theoretical links to each of the BCTs: for example, BCTs designed tochange attitude could be linked to the Theory of Reasoned Action (Ajzen &
Fishbein, 1980), the Theory of Planned Behaviour (Ajzen, 1991), Social Cognitive
Theory (Bandura, 1989) or the Information-Motivation-Behavioural-Skills model.Leeman et al. (2007) linked their superordinate categories with theoreticaldeterminants. However, in all cases, the methodology used to link BCTs to theory
was unclear.
Michie et al. (2008) developed a consensus method for linking theory to BCTs.
Drawing on previous work (Michie et al., 2008), they piloted a method involving amultidisciplinary group of four raters independently rating their confidence thatspecific BCTs could be used to change theoretical determinants of behaviour.
Although they achieved 71% agreement in this exercise, this requires further work
with a larger sample.
In summary, this review identified nine classification systems of BCTs, developed
for a range of behaviours and mainly in relation to systematic reviewing. Five wereunstructured, three had one level of grouping and one had two levels. Links to
theory, or mechanisms of action, were suggestive rather than grounded in a robust
methodology.124 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Discussion
In the natural, medical and social sciences, six distinct types of classification system
are apparent: nomenclatures, ordered sets, hierarchical, matrices, faceted and social
categorisations. It is evident that different systems have been developed for different
purposes. Within behavioural science, eight classification systems of BCTs wereidentified, all either nomenclatures or simple hierarchical systems. It should be noted
that our literature search was confined to articles that presented as a classification
system of BCTs; a wider search of the behaviour change literature may haveuncovered others.
An ideal classification system of BCTs would have clear definitions of BCTs, and
be an effective tool for communicating information, for evidence synthesis and for
intervention development and evaluation. One evident benefit of current classifica-tion systems of BCTs has been to advance methods of evidence synthesis to enable
the identification of active ingredients where conventional meta-analyses of the data
would not have succeeded (e.g., Albarracin et al., 2005; Dombrowski, Sniehotta,
Avenell, MacLennon, & Arau ´jo-Soares, 2012; Michie et al., 2009). Reviewing the
classification systems developed in the natural and social sciences suggests that thehierarchical structure is the most useful for organising the increasingly long lists of
BCTs being developed within Health Psychology. Efforts have begun to be made to
group BCTs according to active ingredients, mechanism of action and operationaluse (see www.ucl.ac.uk/health-psychology/BCTtaxonomy). Groupings such as these
could help systematic reviewers in categorising interventions, intervention designers
in considering how BCTs may work together, evaluators in planning meta-analysesand process evaluation researchers and theorists in testing theory.
Analysing interventions by BCTs has facilitated the identification of effective
components within behavioural interventions by using a statistical technique calledmeta-regression (e.g., Dombrowski et al., 2012; Michie et al., 2009; Webb, Joseph,
Yardley, & Michie, 2010). As the existing, nomenclature-style classification systems
of BCTs typically contain a large number of BCTs, many statistical tests areundertaken which increases the possibility of a Type I error. Grouping BCTs would
alleviate this problem, reducing the number of tests needed to be undertaken and
allow theoretically coherent groupings to be tested directly as was done by Michieet al., (2009).
An important quality of a classification system is clear definitions: precise,
consensually-agreed terms are necessary for accurate reporting of interventions, thus
enabling the establishment of what works and why (Michie, Fixsen, Grimshaw, &
Eccles, 2009). Some classifications of BCTs have achieved this, although others
present the BCTs without definitions. Embry and Biglan (2008) provided the clearestdefinition of a BCT, a technique that is indivisible, reliably affects behaviour and has
an evidence base. Indivisibility is comparable to elements in the Periodic Table: they
cannot be broken down any further, and can be used in combination. This work hasbeen taken forward by a multidisciplinary research project, advised by an
international board of 30 experts, that has produced the most comprehensive
definition to date (see www.ucl.ac.uk/health-psychology/BCTtaxonomy; Michieet al., 2011a). According to this definition, BCTs (1) aim to change behaviour, (2)
are proposed ‘active ingredients ’of interventions, (3) are the smallest components
compatible with retaining the proposed active ingredients, (4) can be used alone or inHealth Psychology Review 125
combination with other BCTs, (5) are observable and replicable, (6) can have a
measurable effect on a specified behaviour[s] and (7) may or may not have an
established empirical evidence base. It should be noted that many BCTs included
within the current taxonomies do not conform to this definition but, rather, arecompounds of BCTs. Such compounds could form a super-ordinate level in a
hierarchical structure.
In theory, hierarchical classification of BCTs could take a bottom-up approach,
building groups of similar techniques or a top-down approach, starting with a
criterion for classification, such as similarity of theoretical basis or practical
application. At present, all of the BCT classification systems with structure havetaken the former approach.
Faceted classification, an alternative multidimensional classification system,
cannot communicate information about relationships between items and their
characteristics; a faceted classification system is essentially a set of discretenomenclatures. Classification of relationships can be achieved with a matrix
approach, but this can only support two or three characteristics, since a greater
number of characteristics would render tabulating the classification systemimpractical. Ordered sets would be inappropriate for classifying BCTs since
BCTs differ on a number of dimensions, do not build on one another and are
not a fixed set.
Multidimensional classification of BCTs will help optimisation approaches to
intervention development. An example of this is the multiphase optimisation strategy
(‘MOST ’; Collins, Murphy, Nair, & Strecher, 2005) involving three phases: a
screening phase, which entails selecting intervention components which merit further
investigation; a refining phase, where interactions between components are
investigated and optimal dosage levels are identified; and a confirming phase, inwhich the optimised intervention is tested. In a fractional factorial design, the
number of cells required is reduced by ‘aliasing ’effects which are known to interact
and only focusing on interactions of interest.
For hierarchical classification of BCTs, there is a question as to whether to use an
evolutionary approach or base classification on similarities and differences. BCTs
themselves may not evolve, per se , but it is likely that underpinning theories will
develop as the science of behaviour change advances. It may therefore be possible totrace this evolution and link BCTs to theory to provide a classification system. One
complexity is that BCTs can be linked to more than one theory: for example,
Abraham and Michie (2008) suggested that the BCT, ‘prompt intention formation ’
was linked to four different theories. This differs from classification in the natural
sciences, such as that based on the evolution of animals.
On the other hand, since BCTs may be quantitatively or qualitatively similar to
one another, a similarities-based ( ‘Linnaean ’) may be practically more useful. The
extent to which each of these methods are useful in behavioural scientific and
technological development is an empirical question, awaiting further research. Aninternational collaboration of behavioural researchers from a range of disciplines has
begun a systematic development of an integrated taxonomy of BCTs and investiga-
tion of how best to structure a hierarchical classification (Michie et al., 2011a; www.ucl.ac.uk/health-psychology/BCTtaxonomy).126 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Conclusions
The development of more useful classification systems in behavioural science can be
informed by existing classification systems in the natural, medical and social sciences.The simplest classification systems, nomenclatures, start with clear definitions of
what is to be classified. More complex classification systems offer an opportunity to
examine relationships between what is classified. Classifications of BCTs vary in
their structures, use of theory and how a BCT is defined; advantages of a hierarchical
structure are presented. Drawing on the knowledge of classification systems acrossscience will help achieve the aim of developing a fully fit for purpose taxonomy of
BCTs, a valuable tool for developing and evaluating behaviour change interventions.
References
Abraham, C., Kelly, M.P ., West, R., & Michie, S. (2009). The UK national institute for health
and clinical excellence public health guidance on behaviour change: A brief introduction.Psychology, Health and Medicine ,14,1/C18.
Abraham, C., & Michie, S. (2008). A taxonomy of behaviour change techniques used in
interventions. Health Psychology ,27, 379/C1387.
Ajzen, I. (1991). The theory of planned behaviour. Organizational Behavior and Human
Decision Processes ,50, 179/C1211.
Ajzen, I., & Fishbein, M. (1980). Understanding attitudes and predicting social behaviour .N e w
Jersey: Prentice-Hall.
Albarrac ı´n, D., Gillette, J.C., Earl, A.N., Glasman, L.R., Durantini, M.R., & Ho, M. (2005).
A test of major assumptions about behaviour change: A comprehensive look at the effectsof passive and active HIV-prevention interventions since the beginning of the epidemic.Psychological Bulletin ,131, 856/C1897.
Bailey, K.D. (1994). Typologies and taxonomies: An introduction to classi ﬁcation techniques .
London: Sage.
Bandura, A. (1989). Human agency in social cognitive theory. American Psychologist ,44,
1175/C11184.
Bensaude-Vincent, B., & Stengers, I. (1996). A history of chemistry . Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Bloom, B.S. (1994). Re ﬂections on the development and use of the taxonomy. In L.W .
Anderson & L.A. Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom ’s taxonomy: A forty-year retrospective (pp. 1/C18).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Broughton, V . (2004). Essential classi ﬁcation . London: Facet.
Cantino, P .D. (2000). Phylogenetic nomenclature: Addressing some concerns. Taxon ,49,
85/C193.
Dombrowski, S.U., Sniehotta, F .F., Avenell, A., MacLennon, G., & Arau ´jo-Soares, V . (2012).
Identifying active ingredients in complex behavioural interventions for obese adults withobesity-related co-morbidities or additional risk factors for co-morbidities: A systematicreview. Health Psychology Review ,6,1/C125.
Dwyer, W .O., Leeming, F.C., Cobern, M.K., & Porter, B.E. (1993). Critical review of
behavioural interventions to preserve the environment: Research since 1980. Environment
and Behavior ,25, 275/C1321.
Eales, S. (2007). The fallen planet. Prospect ,134,3 1/C134.
Embry, D.D., & Biglan, A. (2008). Evidence-based kernels: Fundamental units of behavioural
inﬂuence. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review ,11,7 5/C1113.
Geller, E.S., Berry, T.D., Ludwig, T.D., Evans, R.E., Gilmore, M.R., & Clarke, S.W . (1990). A
conceptual framework for developing and evaluating behaviour change interventions forinjury control. Health Education Research: Theory & Practice ,5, 125/C1137.
Hardeman, W ., Grif ﬁn, S., Johnston, M., Kinmonth, A.L., & Wareham, N.J. (2000).
Interventions to prevent weight gain: A systematic review of psychological models andbehaviour change methods. International Journal of Obesity ,24, 131/C1143.Health Psychology Review 127
Hennig, W . (1975). Cladistic analysis or cladistic classi ﬁcation? A reply to Ernst Mayr.
Systematic Zoology ,24, 244/C1256.
International Astronomical Union (IAU). (2008). Resolution B5: De ﬁnition of planet in the
Solar System . Retrieved from: http://www.iau.org/static/resolutions/Resolution_GA26-5-6.
pdf
International Astronomical Union (IAU). (2009). Naming astronomical objects . Retrieved
from: http://www.iau.org/public_press/themes/naming/
International Health Terminology Standards Development Organisation. (2008). SNOMED
CT Hierarchies . Retrieved from: http://www.ihtsdo.org/snomed-ct/snomed-ct0/snomed-ct-
hierarchies/
Jardine, N., & Sibson, R. (1971). Mathematical taxonomy . London: John Wiley and Sons.
Krathwohl, D.R. (1994). Re ﬂections on the taxonomy: its past, present and future. In L. W .
Anderson & L. A. Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom ’s Taxonomy: A Forty-Year Retrospective (pp. 64 /C1
80). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Kreitzer, A.E., & Madaus, G.F. (1994). Empirical investigations of the hierarchical structure of
the Taxonomy. In L.W . Anderson & L.A. Sosniak (Eds.), Bloom ’s taxonomy: A forty-year
retrospective (pp. 64 /C180). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lambe, P . (2007). Organising knowledge: Taxonomies, knowledge and organisational
effectiveness . Oxford: Chandos.
Leeman, J., Baernholdt, M., & Sandelowski, M. (2007). Developing a theory-based taxonomy
of methods for implementing change in practice. Journal of Advanced Nursing ,58, 191/C1200.
Linnaeus, C. (1751). Philosophia Botanica (S. Freer, Trans.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacMahon, B., & Trichopoulos, D. (1996). Epidemiology: Principles and methods (2nd ed).
Boston: Little, Brown.
Mathes, A. (2004). Folksonomies: Cooperative classi ﬁciation and communication through
shared metadata. Retrieved from: http://adammathes.com/academic/computer-mediated-communication/folksonomies.pdf
McLean, N., Grif ﬁn, S., Toney, K., & Hardeman, W . (2003). Family involvement in weight
control, weight maintenance and weight-loss interventions: A systematic review ofrandomised trials. International Journal of Obesity ,27, 987/C11005.
Michie, S., Hardeman, W ., Fanshawe, T., Prevost, AT., Taylor, L., & Kinmonth, AL. (2008).
Investigating Theoretical Explanations for Behaviour Change: The Case Study ofProActive. Psychology and Health ,23,2 5/C139.
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Eccles, M.P ., Francis, J.J., Hardeman, W ., & Johnston, M. (2011).
Methods for strengthening evaluation and implementation: Specifying components of
behaviour change interventions: A study protocol. Implementation Science ,6, 10.
Michie, S., Abraham, C., Whittington, C., McAteer, J., & Gupta, S. (2009). Effective
techniques in healthy eating and physical activity interventions: A meta-regression. Health
Psychology ,28, 690/C1701.
Michie, S., Ashford, S., Sniehotta, F .F., Dombrowski, S.U., Bishop, A., & French, D.P . (2011a)
Ar e ﬁned taxonomy of behaviour change techniques to help people change their physical
activity and healthy eating behaviours /C1The CALO-RE taxonomy, Psychology & Health ,
26, 1479/C11498.
Michie, S., Churchill, S., & West, R. (2011b). Identifying evidence-based competences required
to deliver behavioural support for smoking cessation. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,41,
59/C170.
Michie, S., Fixsen, D., Grimshaw, J.M., & Eccles, M.P . (2009). Specifying and reporting
complex interventions: The need for a scienti ﬁc method. Implementation Science ,4, 40.
Michie, S., Hardeman, W ., Fanshawe, T., Prevost, A.T., Taylor, L., & Kinmonth, A.L. (2007).
Investigating theoretical explanations for behaviour change: The case study of ProActive.
Psychology & Health ,23,2 5/C139.
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Francis, J., Hardeman, W ., & Eccles, M. (2008). From theory to
intervention: Mapping theoretically derived behavioural determinants to behaviour changetechniques. Applied Psychology: An International Review ,57, 660/C1680.
Moher, D., Schulz, K.F., & Altman, D.G. (2001). The CONSORT statement: Revised
recommendations for improving the quality of reports of parallel group randomized trials.Annals of Internal Medicine ,134, 657/C1662.128 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
NICE: National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence. (2007). Behaviour change at
population, community and individual levels. Retrieved from: http://www.nice.org.uk/
nicemedia/pdf/PH006guidance.pdf
Painter, A.F. (1972). Modern Classi ﬁcation Theory. In A.F. Painter (Ed.), Reader in
classi ﬁcation and descriptive cataloging (pp. 100 /C1106). Washington: National Cash Register
Company.
Peterson, E. (2006). Beneath the metadata: Some philosophical problems with folksonomy.
D-Lib Magazine, 12. Retrieved from: http://www.dlib.org/dlib/november06/peterson/11
peterson.html
Prochaska, J.O., & Velicer, W .F . (1997). The transtheoretical model of health behavior change.
American Journal of Health Promotion ,12,3 8/C148.
Puddephatt, R.J., & Monaghan, P .K. (1986). The periodic table of the elements (2nd ed).
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Seberg, O., & Petersen, G. (2007). Assembling the tree of life: Magnitude, shortcuts and
pitfalls. In T.R. Hodkinson & J.A.N. Parnell (Eds.), Reconstructing the tree of life:
Taxonomy and systematics of species rich taxa (pp. 33 /C146). London: CRC Press.
Simpson, G.G. (1961). Principles of animal taxonomy . New Y ork: Columbia University Press.
Sneath, P .H.A., & Sokal, R.R. (1973). Numerical taxonomy: The principles and practice of
numerical classi ﬁcation . San Francisco: W . H. Freeman.
Spiteri, L.F. (2007). The structure and form of folksonomy tags: The road to the public library
catalog. Information Technology and Libraries ,26(3), 13 /C125.
Webb, T.L., & Sheeran, P . (2006). Does changing behavioural intentions engender behaviour
change? A meta-analysis of the experimental literature. Psychological Bulletin ,132, 249/C1
268.
Webb, T.L., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Michie, S. (2010). Using the internet to promote health
behaviour change: A systematic review and meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis,use of behaviour change techniques, and mode of delivery on ef ﬁcacy. Journal of Medical
Internet Research ,12,1 .
World Health Organisation. (2008). History of the development of the ICD . Retrieved from:
http://www.who.int/classi ﬁcations/icd/en/HistoryOfICD.pdfHealth Psychology Review 129
Supplementary Table. The techniques contained within classi ﬁcation systems of behaviour change techniques.
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
Communication/
education1. Goal or
target specified1. Provide
information onconsequences ofbehaviour in generalPassive strategies Increase coordination to
manage interdependence(Contingency TheoryKernels altering
consequences ofbehaviour Increasing
frequency of
behaviour1. Goal: set behavioural goal Addressing
motivation
Passive 2. Monitoring/
self-monitoring2. Provide
information onconsequences ofbehaviour relevantto the individual1. Attitudinal
arguments1. Centralised care
management1. Verbal praise 2. Standard: decide target
standard of behaviour(specified and observable)1. Provide
information onconsequences ofsmoking andsmoking cessation
1. Lecture 3. Contract 3. Provide
information aboutothers ’approval2. Normative
arguments2. Modified medical
record system2. Peer-to-peer
written praise3. Monitoring: record specified
behaviour (person has access torecorded data of behaviouralperformance e.g. from diary)2. Boost
motivation and selfefficacy
2. Demonstration 4.
Contingenciesor incentives for
remaining in
the programme4. Provide normative
information aboutother ’s behaviour3. Factorial
information3. Workgroup oversight 3. Mystery
motivators4. Record antecedents and
consequences of behaviour(social and environmental
situations and events,
emotions, cognitions)3. Provide
feedback onperformance
3. Policy 5. Graded task 5. Goal setting
(behaviour)4. Behavioural
skills arguments4. Pilot testing 4. Public posting of
feedback of a targetedbehaviour5. Feedback: of monitored (inc.
self-monitored) behaviour4. Provide rewards
contingent onsuccessfully stoppingsmoking
Active 6. Increasing
skills6. Goal setting
(outcome)5. Threat
inducingargumentsRaise awareness of
practice change(Diffusion ofInnovations)5. Principal lottery 6. Comparison: provide
comparative data (cf standard,person ’s own past behaviour,
others ’behaviour)5. Provide
normativeinformation aboutothers ’behaviour
and experiences
1. Commitment 7. Stress
management/
coping skills7. Action planning Active strategies 1. Education 6. Safety or
performance lottery.7. Social comparison: provide
opportunities for social
comparison e.g. contests and
group learning6. Prompt
commitment from
client there and then130 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
2. Discussion 8. Rehearsal of
relevant skills8. Barrier
identification/
problem solving1. Condom use
skills training2. External change
agent7. Team
competition7. Provide rewards
contingent on effort
or progress.
3. Intervention agent 9. Planning,
implementation9. Set graded tasks 2.
Interpersonalskills trainingPersuade via
interpersonal channels/norms (Diffusion ofInnovations/ Theory ofPlanned Behaviour)8. Contingent
music8. Strengthen ex-
smoker identity
Activators 10. Prompts,
triggers, cues10. Prompt review of
behavioural goals3. Self-
managementskills training1. Workgroup develops
change9. Special play 8. Discrepancy assessment:
highlight nature of discrepancy(direction, amount) betweenstandard, own or others ’
behaviour (goes beyond simpleself-monitoring)9. Identify reasons
for wanting and notwanting to stopsmoking
Individual 11.
Environmental
changes11. Prompt review of
outcome goals4. HIV
counselling and
testing2. Opinion leader 10. Choral
responding9. Contract: of agreed
performance of target
behaviour with at least oneother, written and signed10. Explain the
importance of abrupt
cessation
1. Written activator 12. Social
encouragement12. Provide rewards
contingent on effortor progress towards
behaviour5. Condom
provision3. Guidance from
manager11. Mystery
shopper10. Planning: identify
component parts of behaviourand make plan to execute each
one orconsider when and/or
where a behaviour will beperformed i.e. schedulebehaviours (not includingcoping planning /C1see. 11)11. Measure CO
2. Oral activator 13. Persuasive
communication13. Provide rewards
contingent on
successful behaviourPersuade by reinforcing
belief that behaviour will
lead to desirable results
(TPB)12. Peer-to-peer
tutoring11. Coping planning: identify
and plan ways of overcoming
barriers (note, this must
include identification ofspecific barriers e.g. ‘‘problem
solving how to fit into weeklyschedule ’’would not count)12. Conduct
motivational
interviewingHealth Psychology Review 131
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
3. Individual goal 14. Information 14. Shaping 1. Data collection and
feedback13. Computer
action game12. Goal review: assess extent
to which the goal/targetbehaviour is achieved, identifythe factors influencing this andamend goal if appropriateMaximising self-
regulatory capacity
4. Personal goal 15. Personalised
message15. Prompting
generalisation of a
target behaviour2. Financial incentives 14.
Correspondence
training, ‘‘say-do ’’13. Discriminative (learned)
cue: environmental stimulus
that has been repeatedlyassociated with contingentreward for specified behaviour1. Facilitate barrier
identification and
problem solving
5. Competition 16. Modelling
by others16. Prompt self-
monitoring of
behaviour3. Performance
evaluations15.
Correspondence
training, ‘‘do-say ’’14. Prompt: stimulus that
elicits behaviour (inc.
telephone calls or postal
reminders designed to promptthe behaviour)2. Facilitate
relapse prevention
and coping
6. Incentive 17. Homework 17. Prompt self-
monitoring ofbehaviouraloutcomesIncrease behavioural
control (TPB)Decreasing frequency
of behaviour15. Reward: contingent valued
consequence i.e. if and only ifbehaviour is performed (inc.social approval, exc. general
non-contingent encouragement
or approval)3. Facilitate action
planning/helpidentify relapsetriggers
7. Disincentive 18. Personal
experiments18. Prompt focus on
past success1. Reminder systems 1. Time out 16. Punishment: contingent
aversive consequence i.e. if andonly if behaviour is notperformed4. Facilitate goal
setting
Group 19. Experiential 19. Provide feedback
on performance2.Environmental
change2. Sit and watch 17. Omission: contingent
removal of valued consequencei.e. if and only if behaviour isnot performed5. Prompt review
of goals
1. Assigned goal 20. Provide
information onwhere and when to
perform the
behaviourDesignation of change
leader3. Taxes on
consumptivebehaviours18. Negative reinforcement:
contingent removal of aversiveconsequence i.e. if & only if
behaviour is performed6. bPrompt self
recording132 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
2. Team goal 21. Provide
instruction on howto perform thebehaviour4. Positive note
home for inhibition19. Threat: offer future
punishment or removal ofreward contingent onperformance7. Advise on
changing routing
3. Competition 22. Model/
demonstrate thebehaviour5. Timed rewards
for inhibition20. Fear arousal: induce
aversive emotional stateassociated with the behaviour8. Advise on
environmentalrestructuring
4. Incentive 23. Teach to use
prompts/cues6. Premack
principle21. Anticipated regret: induce
expectations of future regretabout non-performance ofbehaviour9. Set graded tasks
5. Disincentive 24. Environmental
restructuring7. Response-cost 22. Graded tasks: set easy tasks
to perform, making themincreasingly difficult untiltarget behaviour performed10. Advise on
conserving mentalresources
Consequences 25. Agree
behavioural contract8. Low emotion or
‘‘private ’’reprimands23. Instruction: teach new
behaviour required for
performance of target
behaviour (not as part ofgraded hierarchy or as part ofmodelling) e.g. give clearinstructions.11. Advise on
avoidance of social
cues for smoking
Individual 26. Prompt practice 9. Stop clock 24. Shaping: build up
behaviour by initially
reinforcing behaviour closest to
required behaviour andsystematically alteringbehaviour required to achievecontingent reinforcement12. Facilitate
restructuring of
social life
1. Feedback 27. Use of follow up
prompts10. Law
enforcement fine or
citation25. Chaining: build up
behaviour by starting with final
component; gradually addcomponents earlier in sequence13. Advise on
methods of weight
controlHealth Psychology Review 133
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
2. Reward 28. Facilitate social
comparison11. Over-correction
or positive practice26. Behavioural rehearsal:
perform behaviour (repeatedly)14. Teach
relaxation techniques
3. Penalty 29. Plan social
support/socialchange12. Buzzer/noise
training27. Mental rehearsal: imagine
performing the behaviourrepeatedlyAdjuvant activities
Group 30. Prompt
identification as rolemodel/position
advocateKernels affecting
behaviours primarilyvia antecedents28. Habit formation: perform
same behaviour in samecontext1. Advise on stop-
smoking medication
1. Feedback 31. Prompt
anticipated regret1. Non-verbal
transition cues29. Role play: perform
behaviour in simulatedsituation2. Advise on/
facilitate use of socialsupport
2. Reward 32. Fear arousal 2. Stop lights 30. Behavioural experiments:
testing hypotheses about the
behaviour, its causes and
consequences, by collectingand interpreting data3. Adopt
appropriate local
procedures to enable
clients to obtain freemedication
3. Penalty 33. Prompt self-talk 3. Boundary cues
and railings31. Modelling: observe the
behaviour of others4. Ask about
experience of stopsmoking medication
34. Prompt use of
imagery4. Cooperative,
structured peer play32. Vicarious reinforcement:
observe the consequences of
others ’behaviour5. Give options for
additional or later
support
35. Relapseprevention/copingplanning5. Self-modelling 33. Self talk: planned self-
statements (aloud or silent) toimplement behaviour changetechniquesGeneral aspects of
the interactionFocusing on deliveryof the intervention
36. Stress
management6. Self-monitoring 34. Imagery: use planned
images (visual, motor, sensory)to implement behaviour changetechniques (inc. mentalrehearsal)1. Tailor
interactionsappropriately134 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
37. Emotional
control training7. Paragraph
shrinking35. Cognitive restructuring:
changing cognitions aboutcauses and consequences ofbehaviour2. Emphasise
choice
38. Motivational
interviewing8. Errorless
discrimination
training36. Relapse prevention: identify
situations that increase the
likelihood of the behaviour not
being performed and applycoping strategies to thosesituationsInformation
gathering
39. Time
managementKernels affecting
behaviours primarily
via relational frames37. Behavioural information:
provide information about
antecedents or consequences of
the behaviour, or connectionsbetween them, or behaviourchange techniques1. Assess current
and past smoking
behaviour
40. General
communicationskills training1. Adjectival noun
for belonging tostatus group38. Personalised message:
tailor techniques or messagesfrom others to individual ’s
resources and context (includes
stages of change basedinformation; doesn ’t include
personal plans and feedback)2. Assess readiness
and ability to quit
2. Public
commitment39. Verbal persuasion/
persuasive communication:
credible source presents
arguments in favour of thebehaviour. Note, there must beevidence of presentation ofarguments; general pro-behaviour communication doesnot count.3. Assess past
history of quit
attemptsHealth Psychology Review 135
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
3.‘‘US’’and
‘‘THEM ’’role
framing40. Social support
(instrumental): others performcomponent tasks of behaviouror tasks that would compete
with behaviour e.g. offering
childcare4. Assess
withdrawalsympotoms
4. Graphic/node
maps41. Social support (emotional):
others listen, provide empathyand give generalised positivefeedback5. Assess nicotine
dependence
5. MI 42. Decision-making: generate
alternative courses of action,
and pros and cons of each, andweigh them up.6. Assess number
of contacts who
smoke
6. Media
associating behaviourwith immediate
negative social
outcomes43. Coping strategies:
behaviours undertaken to avoidor reduce stressors7. Assess attitude
to smoking
Kernels affecting
behaviours primarilyvia physiology8. Assess level of
social support
1. Pleasant greeting
with or without
positive physical
touch44. Stress management:
behaviours undertaken to
reduce stressors or impact of
stressors9. Explain how
tobacco dependence
develops
2. Massage,
brushing or stroking45.Relaxation: systematic
instruction in physical andcognitive strategies to reducesympathetic arousal, and to
increase muscle relaxation and
a feeling of calm10. Assess
physiological andmental functioning
3. Turtle technique 46. Desensitisation: exposure
to threatening experiencesGeneral
communication136 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
4. Omega-3 fatty
acid supplementationor increased fishconsumption47. Systematic desensitisation:
graded exposure toincreasingly threateningexperiences1. Build general
rapport
5. Zinc
supplementation48. Time management: action
planning applied to theperceived problem of shortageof time2. Elicit and
answer questions
6.‘‘Rough and
tumble ’’free play
with higher status
conspecific49. Motivational interviewing:
elicit self-motivating
statements& evaluation of own
behaviour to reduce resistanceto change3. Explain the
purpose of CO
monitoring
7. Aerobic play or
behaviour50. Environmental change:
change the environment inorder to facilitate the targetbehaviour (other than prompts,
rewards and punishments e.g.
choice of food provided)4. Explain
expectationsregarding treatmentprogramme
8. Nasal breathing 51 Set homework task 5. Offer/direct
towards appropriatewritten materials
9. Progressive
muscle relaxation52. Non-specific social support
(only if additional to 40 and
41)6. Provide
information on
withdrawalsymptoms
53 General information aboutthe behaviour and behaviourchange (other than 37)7. Use reflective
listening
54. General problem-solving 8. Elicit client
views
55. Anti-depression skillstraining9. Summarise
information/confirmclient decisionsHealth Psychology Review 137
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
56.Biofeedback 10. Provide
reassurance
57. Differential reinforcement
58. Escape
59. Extinction60. Flooding61. Group contingencies62. Implosive therapy63. Avoidance
64. Counter-conditioning
65. Distraction66. Exposure67. Fading; thinning68. Flooding in imagination69. Habit reversal70. Negative punishment
71. Non contingent delivery of
reinforcing stimuli72. Overcorrection73. Peer-administeredcontingencies74. Problem identification
75. Rational emotive therapy
76. Reinforcer sampling77. Response cost78. Response priming79. Satiation80. Screening81. Social skills training
82. Stress inoculation program
83. Symbolic desensitization84. Thought stopping85. Time out86. Token economy138 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
87. Activity scheduling
88. Adventitious reinforcement
/ superstitious conditioning89. Altering antecedent chains90. Anger control training91. Assertion training92. Buddy system93. Clarification (supportive
therapy)
94. Classical conditioning95. Community reinforcement96. Covert conditioning97. Covert sensitisation98. Deflection techniques
99. Discrimination training
100. Emetic therapy101. Encounter (existentialanalysis)102. Fishbowl103. Fogging104. Functional
communication training
105. Functional family therapy106. Identification(psychoanalysis)107. Instigation108. Interpretation
(psychoanalysis)
109. Least-to-most prompting110. Lottery111. Most to least promptsequences112. Motivational techniquesHealth Psychology Review 139
Supplementary table ( Continued )
Geller et al. (1990)Hardeman et al.
(2000)Abraham and
Michie (2008) (40-
item extension)Albarrac ı´n et al.
(2005) Leeman et al. (2007)Embry and Biglan
(2008) Michie et al. (2008) Michie et al. (2011)
113. Multiple exemplar
training (generalisation)114. Natural maintainingcontingencies (generalisation)115. Negotiation training116. Paradoxical instructions
117. Paradoxical intention
(behaviour therapy)118. Positive reinforcement119. Positive scanning120. Premackian reinforcers121. Rate reduction
122. Reassurance (supportive
therapy)123. Recapitulation124. Reframing125. Reinforcer displacement126. Response priming127. Restitution
128. Rule release
129. Self-exploration130. Self-help131. Small group exercises132. Stimulus generalisation133. Stimulus narrowing
134. Systematic rational
conditioning135. Thinning136. Turtle technique137. Vicarious punishment140 Z. Stavri and S. Michie
