RESEARCH Open Access
Development of a framework and coding
system for modifications and adaptations of
evidence-based interventions
Shannon Wiltsey Stirman1,2,3*, Christopher J Miller2,5, Katherine Toder4and Amber Calloway6
Abstract
Background: Evidence-based interventions are frequently modified or adapted during the implementation process.
Changes may be made to protocols to meet the needs of the target population or address differences between
the context in which the intervention was originally designed and the one into which it is implemented [ Addict
Behav 2011, 36(6):630 –635]. However, whether modification compromises or enhances the desired benefits of the
intervention is not well understood. A challenge to understanding the impact of specific types of modifications is a
lack of attention to characterizing the different types of changes that may occur. A system for classifying the types
of modifications that are made when interventions and programs are implemented can facilitate efforts to
understand the nature of modifications that are made in particular contexts as well as the impact of these
modifications on outcomes of interest.
Methods: We developed a system for classifying modifications made to interventions and programs across a
variety of fields and settings. We then coded 258 modifications identified in 32 published articles that described
interventions implemented in routine care or community settings.
Results: We identified modifications made to the content of interventions, as well as to the context in which
interventions are delivered. We identified 12 different types of content modifications, and our coding scheme also
included ratings for the level at which these modifications were made (ranging from the individual patient level up
to a hospital network or community). We identified five types of contextual modifications (changes to the format,
setting, or patient population that do not in and of themselves alter the actual content of the intervention). We
also developed codes to indicate who made the modifications and identified a smaller subset of modifications
made to the ways that training or evaluations occur when evidence-based interventions are implemented. Rater
agreement analyses indicated that the coding scheme can be used to reliably classify modifications described in
research articles without overly burdensome training.
Conclusions: This coding system can complement research on fidelity and may advance research with the goal of
understanding the impact of modifications made when evidence-based interventions are implemented. Such
findings can further inform efforts to implement such interventions while preserving desired levels of program or
intervention effectiveness.
Keywords: Implementation, Modification, Adaptation, Sustainability
* Correspondence: sws@bu.edu
1Women ’s Health Sciences Division, National Center for PTSD, Boston, MA,
USA
2VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA
Full list of author information is available at the end of the articleImplementation
Science
© 2013 Stirman et al.; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
Background
Evidence-based programs and interventions are fre-
quently modified during the implementation process toaddress differences between the context in which the
intervention was originally designed and tested, and the
one into which it is ultimately implemented [1]. Descrip-tions of modifications in the research literature range
broadly from slight changes in terminology or delivery
in different languages, to removal of core componentsor integration with other interventions. Modifications
can include adaptations, which are planned or purpose-
ful changes to the design or delivery of an intervention,but they can also include unintentional deviations from
the interventions as originally designed. That is, some
modifications occur with the intention to retain fidelityto the fundamental elements or spirit of the interven-
tion, whereas others may be unplanned changes made in
reaction to a specific circumstance. Some may be rela-tively minor, while others might represent a significant
change. Such variation in the nature of modifications
can have very different implications for outcomes ofinterest. While some modifications might facilitate im-
plementation and sustainability by improving the fit be-
tween the intervention and the target population or thecontext into which it is introduced, modifications may
also erode treatment integrity. However, little research
has been conducted to determine whether modificationsof different natures compromise or enhance the desired
benefits of interventions. Assessing fidelity, which com-
prises adherence to the intervention components, com-petence or skill with which the intervention is delivered,
and differentiation from other treatments [2], by itself
may fail to capture certain types of modifications ( e.g.,
minor changes to terminology or language). While the
recommended considerations for fidelity include unique
and essential elements, necessary but not unique, ac-ceptable but not necessary, and proscribed elements [3],
most fidelity instruments do not contain an exhaustive
listing of acceptable and proscribed behaviors. Thus,fidelity monitoring alone will not facilitate an under-
standing of whether different types of modifications are
detrimental, non-detrimental or enhancements [4,5].
Without a better understanding of the nature and im-
pact of modification, and the levels of fidelity necessaryto promote desired outcomes, it is difficult to determine
the best course of action with respect to the implemen-
tation of complex interventions in different contexts.This manuscript presents a comprehensive framework
and model for classifying a broad range of modifications
that may be made to evidence-based interventions. Sucha framework, by quantifying the specific types and levels
of modifications, can allow for more precise determin-
ation of the effects of such modifications on clinical orimplementation outcomes of interest.While the case has been made both for strict fidelity
to interventions and for modifying interventions as ne-
cessary [4,6-10], few studies have examined the impactof modifications to treatments on health-related behav-
iors or outcomes. Among those studies, results have not
been consistent. Levitt and colleagues compared out-comes of an intervention for post-traumatic stress dis-
order (PTSD) that included the option to use certain
prescribed modifications, such as repeating or skippingmodules, with clinical outcomes from a randomized
controlled trial [11]. In this study, levels of fidelity to
core intervention components remained high when theintervention was delivered with modifications, and
PTSD symptom outcomes were comparable to those in
a controlled clinical trial [11]. Galovski and colleaguesalso found positive outcomes when a highly specified set
of adaptations were used in a different PTSD treatment
[12]. Other studies have demonstrated similar or im-proved outcomes after modifications were made to fit
the needs of the local audience and expand the target
population beyond the original intervention. For ex-ample, an enhanced outcome was demonstrated after
modifying a brief HIV risk-reduction video intervention
to match presenter and participant ethnicity and sex[13]; effectiveness was also retained after modifying an
HIV risk-reduction intervention to meet the needs of
five different communities [14]. However, in other stud-ies, modifications to enhance local acceptance appeared
to compromise effectiveness. For example, Stanton and
colleagues modified a sexual risk reduction interventionthat had originally been designed for urban populations
to address the preferences and needs of a more rural
population, but found that the modified interventionwas less effective than the original, unmodified version
[15]. Similarly, in another study, cultural modifications
that reduced dosage or eliminated core components ofthe Strengthening Families Program increased retention
but reduced positive outcomes [16].
A challenge to a more complete understanding of the
impact of specific types of modifications is a lack of
attention to their classification. Some descriptions of
intervention modifications and adaptations have been
published (c.f. [17-19]), but there have been relatively
few efforts to systematically categorize them. Researchersidentified modifications made to evidence-based inter-
ventions such as substance use disorder treatments
[1] and prevention programs [20] through interviewswith facilitators in different settings. Others have
described the process of adaptation (e.g., [21,22]). For
example, Devieux and colleagues [23] described aprocess of operationalizing the adaptation process based
on Bauman and colleagues ’framework for adaptation [8],
which includes efforts to retain the integrity of an inter-vention ’s causal/conceptual model. Other researchersStirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 2 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
[24-26] have also made recommendations regarding
specific processes for adapting mental health interventions
to address individual or population-level needs while pre-serving fidelity. Some work has been done to characterize
and examine the impact of modifications made at the indi-
vidual and population level. For example, Castro, Barreraand Martinez presented a program adaptation framework
that described two basic forms of cultural adaptation: the
modification of program content and modification of pro-gram delivery, and made distinctions between tailored and
individualized interventions [27]. A description of person-
centered interventions similarly differentiates betweentailored, personalized, targeted and individualized inter-
ventions, all of which may actually lie on a continuum in
terms of their complexity and comprehensiveness [27].
While these existing recommendations and models for
adaptation provide critical guidance regarding the
process of adaptation, particularly to improve the cul-tural relevance and individual-level ‘fit’of interventions,
adaptations may also occur to address provider needs or
constraints in the intervention or program setting orhealthcare system. Relatively little research has been
conducted to empirically classify the nature of the full
range of modifications made to interventions in routinecare settings. Recognizing the benefits to identifying
common types of modifications to evidence-based inter-
ventions, Hill and colleagues identified the types of mod-ifications made for a single evidence-based prevention
program in a statewide implementation [20]. Although
they suggested that their study was a starting point inthe development of a set of modification categories that
generalize across interventions, the modifications that
they identified were highly specific to the interventionthat they examined. A more general and developed tax-
onomy can facilitate efforts to understand the nature of
modifications that are made, whether by design or hap-penstance, as well as the impact of different types of modi-
fications on implementation and health-related outcomes
of interest. As a next step toward this understanding, it isnecessary to identify the types of modifications that may
occur when implementing interventions under a broad set
of circumstances and in a variety of settings.
The purpose of this study was to develop a coding
scheme to characterize modifications made to evidence-based interventions when they are implemented in con-
texts or with populations that differ from that in which
they were originally developed or tested. Such a systemcan facilitate more systematic study of the types of mod-
ifications that are most commonly made across different
contexts, populations and interventions. Additionally, itcan provide a way to study the impact of different types
of modifications on outcomes of interest. Hill and
colleagues described a theory that a few types of modi-fications are likely to comprise the majority of allmodifications that occur in practice [20]. Identifying
what those modifications are, and what their impacts are
for different interventions, can assist intervention devel-opers and those who implement the interventions in de-
termining and facilitating the range of modifications that
are acceptable —and in preventing those that are not.
We therefore sought to identify examples of a variety of
modifications that practitioners, treatment developers,
and other stakeholders made to a diverse set of interven-tions and programs. We intended this framework to apply
in particular to three types of programs and interventions
outlined by Scheirer [28]: those implemented by individualproviders; programs requiring coordination among mul-
tiple staff; and new procedures aimed at targeting individ-
ual behaviors or behavioral health conditions.
Method
In developing the coding system, we searched the litera-ture for articles published or in press before June, 2012,
that assessed or described modifications to interventions
implemented in routine service settings. We searchedthe following databases: Medline, ISI, PsycInfo, Aca-
demic Search Premier, Health Source, ERIC, Pubmed
and Google Scholar, using the terms ‘modif ’or‘adapt ’
and ‘evidence based treatment ’or‘evidence-based inter-
vention. ’We also employed a snowballing strategy, in
which we searched the reference sections of articles thatwe identified as well as theoretical papers on implemen-
tation that discussed modification and adaptation. Two
authors (SWS, AC) reviewed abstracts and full text arti-cles when necessary to determine their eligibility for this
project and discussed one difference of opinion regard-
ing inclusion with the rest of the study team. We in-cluded articles that provided sufficient detail about one
or more modifications to facilitate coding. Modifications
could be either adaptations (intentional, planned changesthat typically included an effort to preserve fidelity) or
changes that were made without premeditation during the
delivery of the intervention. Articles were excluded if theyassessed fidelity but did not describe modifications; if the
interventions were developed, as opposed to being modi-
fied, for the purpose of the study or implementation pro-ject; or if they only provided recommendations for
adaptation of an intervention without describing at least
one specific modification that was made during the courseof a research or implementation effort (Figure 1).
Once identified, articles were examined and segmented
into discrete units for coding. One team member (SWS)segmented the articles into separate descriptions of modi-
fications, and the remaining team members reviewed the
entire articles and provided feedback regarding the accur-acy of the segmentation process. Due to the dearth of pre-
vious work that has been done to actually classify a broad
range of modifications, we used an analytic approach thatStirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 3 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
was rooted in grounded theory [29,30] to code the data
from these articles. Using an iterative process, the study
team examined the subset of identified segments that de-
scribed modifications to identify emergent themes or cat-
egories. We then applied these themes to additional
segments, allowing additional categories to emerge until
theoretical saturation was achieved and a comprehensive
coding scheme was developed. We specified characteris-
tics of each category of modifications and ensured that the
categories were mutually exclusive and exhaustive by com-
bining or revising redundant codes. We also provided a
draft of the framework and codebook to seven implemen-
tation researchers who were interested in the subject of
modification and requested feedback. No additional codes
or alternative classification structures were suggested, al-
though some suggested combining some similar con-
structs into a single code and identified aspects of the
codebook that could be clarified. After this feedback was
incorporated, two team members (SWS, KT) then re-
examined the article data, such that all segments identified
in each article were coded with the finalized codebook.
The two raters overlapped on 20% of the identified seg-
ments, and we computed Cohen ’s kappa coefficients [31]
to determine interrater reliability for each rating category.
Results
A total of 32 articles were iden tified [9,11,13,15-18,20,32-51],
which described 258 unique modifications (see Table 1).
The types of intervention included preventive and health
promotion interventions (n = 15), mental or behavioral
health (n = 13), behavioral medicine (n = 3), and a multidi-
mensional complex care coordination intervention (n = 1).
Settings in which the interventions were delivered in-
cluded hospitals and medical clinics, mental health clinics,
substance abuse treatment programs, human serviceorganizations, housing shelters, community organizations,
employment settings, bars, and schools. Twenty-three arti-
cles provided author descriptions of modifications, four
identified modifications through interviews with providers,
two utilized observation or fidelity rating, and three based
findings on a combination of observation and interviews.
Classification of modifications
Our coding process resulted in the identification of
modifications to the context of program or intervention
delivery, modifications to the intervention or program
content itself, and modifications made during an imple-
mentation effort to training or evaluation processes. Fur-
thermore, we included a code specifying who made the
decision to make each modification. Figure 2 represents
the coding system that emerged from this process, which
is described in greater detail below. A comprehensive
coding manual that includes decision rules and instruc-
tions regarding how to code each level is available by re-
quest from the first author. Contextual modifications
include format, setting, channel of delivery and inter-
vention recipients, and are about ‘setting the stage ’for
an intervention to be delivered. Content modifications
focus on the actual delivery of the intervention content.
Training and evaluation modifications represent changes
made ‘behind the scenes ’during an implementation ef-
fort. Although modifications to context and training/
evaluation codes were not always accompanied by sub-
stantial changes to the intervention content, we included
them because it is possible that such changes could have
an impact on fidelity, clinical outcomes, or the success
of an implementation effort. Table 2 includes the fre-
quency with which each modification occurred, along
with rater agreement statistics.
Figure 1 Article selection procedure and results.Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 4 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
By whom was the decision to modify made?
This code indicates the individual or group of individ-
uals who made the decision regarding whether or howto modify the intervention. Cohen ’s kappa for this code
was 0.80, indicating substantial agreement.
1. Provider, practitioner, or facilitator: The individual
who delivers the intervention made the modification.
2. Team/multiple providers: A group of providers
modified the treatment ( e.g., either an intervention
that requires multiple providers is modified by those
providers, or a unit of providers decide together todeliver a program or intervention in a different way).3. Administrator or supervisor: The individual
responsible for oversight of an individual provider,
team, unit, organization or system decided how tomodify the intervention or program.
4. Researcher: A researcher determined how to modify
a program or intervention for the purposes ofresearch ( e.g., to study the impact of a particular
adaptation or set of adaptations).
5. Purveyor or intervention developer: The individual
who developed the intervention or an (often
external) individual with expertise in the
intervention who was tasked with supporting theimplementation determined how to adapt or modifyTable 1 Articles included in coding procedure
Citation Type of program Source of modification data
Aarons et al., [ 35] Mental health Behavioral observation
Blasinsky, Goldman & Unutzer, [ 46] Collaborative care/mental health Observation and interview
Devieux et al., [ 23] HIV/behavioral medicine Author description
Dushay et al., [ 41] HIV Prevention Author description
Hasson, Blomberg & Duner, [ 44] Complex care Observation and interview
Hill, Maucione & Hood, [ 20] Substance abuse prevention Clinician interview
Hinton et al., [ 32] Mental health Author description
Holliday et al., [ 51] Health promotion Observation and interview
Kalichman et al., [ 13] HIV Prevention Author description
Kaysen et al., [ 17] Mental health Author description
Kelly et al., [ 9] HIV Prevention Author description
Kennedy et al., [ 14] HIV Prevention Author description
Kumpfer, Smith & Bellamy, [ 16] Prevention Author description
Leerlooijer et al., [ 19] Sexual risk prevention Author description
Levitt et al., [ 11] Mental health Author description
Lundgren et al., [ 1] Substance abuse Clinician interview
Lyon et al., [ 38] Mental health Author description
Malow et al., [ 39] HIV Prevention Author description
McCabe et al., [ 33] Mental health Author description
McIntyre, [ 38] Mental health Author description
Melde, Esbensen & Tusinski, [ 47] Prevention Behavioral observation
Miller, [ 42] HIV Prevention Author description
Nastasi et al., [ 21] Sexual risk prevention Author description
Noonan et al., [ 49] Sexual violence prevention Clinician interview
Owczarzak & Dickson-Gomez, [ 37] HIV Prevention Clinician interview
Remien et al., [ 48] HIV/behavioral medicine Author description
Salerno et al., [ 18] Mental health Author description
Stanton et al., [ 15] Sexual risk prevention Author description
Tortolero et al., [ 22] Sexual risk prevention Author description
Webster-Stratton & Herman, [ 50] Mental health Author description
Webster-Stratton & Reid, [ 34] Mental health Author description
Williams & Williams, [ 45] Behavioral medicine Author descriptionStirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 5 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
the treatment. If the purveyor and researcher are the
same individual, the coding decision is made based
on whether the modification is for research or
implementation purposes.
6. Coalition of Stakeholders: A group of stakeholders
actively participated in the decision-making
regarding the types of modifications that are madeto an intervention. If the purveyor or researchers
used focus groups, interviews, or other means of
gathering input to guide their decisions regardingmodifications, this code was NOT used, unless
stakeholders also directly participated in the process
of using that information to adapt the intervention.
Contextual modifications
Similar to Castro and colleagues ’description of differing
forms of delivery [27], contextual modifications were de-fined as changes made to delivery of the same program
content, but with modifications to the format or channel,
the setting or location in which the overall intervention isdelivered, or the personnel who deliver the intervention.
We also include in this category the population to which
an intervention is delivered. Modifications were onlycoded as contextual if an intervention was specifically
designed for a particular context or population and then
applied elsewhere or delivered in a different format thanoriginally designed. Modifications were considered to be
contextual if one of the elements described below was
changed, whether or not alterations to the content of theintervention were made. When content-level changes
were also made, they were coded separately. A total of 41
contextual modifications (16% of the total sample ofmodifications) were described in the sample of articles.
The subset of segments that was double-coded for reliabil-
ity purposes indicated perfect agreement for the presence
of contextual modifications.
1. Format: Changes are made to the format or channel
of treatment delivery ( e.g., a treatment originally
designed to be used one-on-one that is now
delivered in a group format).
2. Setting: The intervention is being delivered in a
different setting or location ( e.g., a treatment
originally designed to be used in a mental health
clinic setting that is now delivered in primary care).
3. Personnel: The intervention is being delivered by
personnel with different characteristics ( e.g., a
treatment originally designed to be administered bya mental health professional is now delivered by
clergy).
4. Population: An intervention that was specifically
developed to target a particular population is being
delivered to a different population than originally
intended ( e.g., an intervention developed for patients
with Borderline Personality Disorder is now being
delivered to individuals with Substance
Dependence).
Modifications to training and evaluation processes
Changes made to the procedures for training personnelor evaluating the program are classified separately fromcontent or contextual modifications, as they occur ‘behind
the scenes ’and do not necessarily impact intervention
content or the context of delivery. Examples includeFigure 2 System of classifying modifications to evidence-based programs or interventions.Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 6 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
expanding training from a single day to a three-day work-
shop, or making changes to the type of evaluation data or
procedures for collecting evaluation data.Content modifications
Content modifications are changes made to the inter-vention procedures, materials or delivery. They appearTable 2 Modifications and adaptations made to programs and interventions
Decision maker (overall kappa = 0.80, n = 261) Frequency % of total modifications
Individual practitionera55 21
Team or group of practitioners 24 9Administrator 2 <1Researcher 22 8Intervention developer or purveyor
b70 27
Coalition of stakeholdersc76 29
Unknown/insufficient information 12 5Contextual modifications (overall kappa = 1.00, n = 41) Frequency % of contextual modifications % of total modificationsFormat 8 25 3Setting 6 19 2Personnel 10 3 4
Population 8 25 3
Training and evaluation Processes 9 - 3Content modifications (n = 217) Frequency % of content modifications % of total modificationsLevel (overall kappa = 0.79)Individual recipient 14 6 5Cohort 14 6 5Population
d71 33 28
Provider/facilitator 20 9 8Unit
e38 18 15
Hospital/organization 22 10 9Network/community
f38 18 15
Nature of modification (overall kappa = 0.87)Tailoring/tweaking/refining
f73 34 28
Adding elementsg62 29 24
Removing elementsg33 15 13
Shortening/condensingh17 8 7
Lengthening/extending 12 6 5Substituting elements 5 2 2
Re-ordering elements 4 2 2
Integrating another approach into the intervention 3 1 1Integrating the intervention into another approach 2 1 1Departing from the intervention ( “Drift ”) 1 <1 <1
Loosening structure 1 <1 <1Repeating elements 1 <1 <1
Note: Three modifications that were identified in the articles did not contain sufficient detail to be rated.
aRaw agreement for this category was 100%.
bRaw agreement for this category was 82%.
cRaw agreement for this category was 73%.
dRaw agreement for this category was 87%.
eRaw agreement for this category was 67%.
fRaw agreement for this category was 91%.
gRaw agreement for these categories was 83%.
hRaw agreement for this category was 86%.Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 7 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
to occur at multiple levels and in differing contexts,
ranging from changes made for an individual recipient
to changes made uniformly across an entire network,community or system. Therefore, we included a code
for both the level at which the modification was made
(e.g., for a single patient vs. across the entire clinic),
and the nature of the modification itself. A total of 217
content modifications (84% of all identified modifica-
tions) were described in the articles that were reviewed.Table 2 summarizes the frequency with which modifica-
tion occurred at the following levels. Cohen ’sk a p p af o r
agreement on levels was 0.79, indicating substantialagreement [52].
Levels at which content modifications occur
1. Individual recipient level: The intervention is
modified for a particular recipient ( e.g., simplifying
language if a patient has cognitive impairment or if
language barriers exist; changes to increase cultural
relevance for an individual recipient).
2. Cohort level: The intervention is modified for
individuals grouped within the intervention setting
into a treatment group, a class, or other type ofcohort ( e.g., a specific psychotherapy group, grade
or classroom).
3. Population level: The intervention is modified for
application to a particular cultural, ethnic, clinical or
social group ( e.g., repetition of intervention
components for all patients with cognitiveimpairments; development of culturally relevant
vignettes to be used with all individuals of a
particular ethnic identity).
4. Provider/facilitator level: Modifications are made
by a clinician/facilitator for all of their participants
(e.g.,‘In e v e rs e ta na g e n d aw h e nId oc o g n i t i v e
therapy ’).
5. Unit level: A modification is made by all of the
facilitators in a unit ( e.g., clinic/department/grade)
within a larger organization ( e.g.,‘We can only do
60-minute intervention sessions instead of 90-
minute sessions in our clinic ’).
6. Hospital/Organization level: Modifications are made
by an entire organization.
7. Network/Community level: Modifications are
applied by an entire network or system of hospitals/
clinics/schools ( e.g., a Veterans Affairs VISN; school
district) or community.
Types of content modifications
We identified 12 different types of content modifica-tions. Cohen ’s kappa for the nature of modifications was
0.87, suggesting that rater agreement for these categories
was in the ‘almost perfect ’range [52]. Regarding reliabilityfor individual codes, raw agreement was at least 80% for
each code that was applied more than 15 times in our
dataset; less frequently-applied codes were not subjectedto reliability analyses.
1. Tailoring/tweaking/refining: This code was assigned to
any minor change to the intervention that leaves all of
the major intervention principles and techniques intact
while making the intervent ion more appropriate,
applicable or acceptable ( e.g., modifying language,
creating slightly different versions of handouts or
homework assignments, cultural adaptations).
2. Adding elements (intervention modules or
activities): Additional materials or activities are
inserted that are consistent with the fundamentals ofthe intervention ( e.g., adding role play exercises to a
unit on assertiveness in a substance abuse
prevention intervention).
3. Removing elements (removing/skipping intervention
modules or components): Particular elements of the
intervention are not included ( e.g., leaving out a
demonstration on condom use in an HIV prevention
intervention for adolescents).
4. Shortening/condensing (pacing/timing): A shorter
amount of time than prescribed is used to complete
the intervention or intervention sessions ( e.g.,
shorter spacing between sessions, or shorteningsessions, offering fewer sessions, or going through
particular modules or concepts more quickly
without skipping material).
5. Lengthening/extending (pacing/timing): A longer
amount of time than prescribed by the manual/
protocol is spent to complete intervention orintervention sessions ( e.g., greater spacing between
sessions, longer sessions, more sessions, or spending
more time on one or more modules/activities orconcepts).
6. Substituting elements: A module or activity is
replaced with something that is different insubstance ( e.g., replacing a module on condoms
with one on abstinence in an HIV prevention
program).
7. Re-ordering elements: Modules/activities or
concepts are completed in a different order fromwhat is recommended in the manual/protocol. This
code would not be applied if the protocol allows
flexibility in the order in which specific modules orinterventions occur.
8. Integrating another approach into the intervention:
The intervention of interest is used as the startingpoint, but aspects of different therapeutic
approaches or interventions are also used ( e.g.,
integrating an ‘empty chair ’exercise into a ‘CBT for
Depression ’treatment protocol).Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 8 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
9. Integrating the intervention into another approach:
Another intervention is used as the starting point,
but elements of the intervention of interest areintroduced ( e.g., integrating motivational
enhancement strategies into a weight loss
intervention protocol).
10.Repeating elements: One or more modules, sessions,
or activities that are normally prescribed or
conducted once during a protocol are used morethan once .
11.Loosening structure: Elements intended to structure
intervention sessions do not occur as prescribed inthe manual/protocol ( e.g., the ‘check-in ’at the
beginning of a group intervention is less formally
structured; clinician does not follow an agenda thatwas established at the beginning of the session).
12.Departing from the intervention ( ‘drift ’): The
intervention is not used in a particular situation orthe intervention is stopped, whether this stoppage
was for part of a session or a decision to discontinue
the intervention altogether ( e.g.,‘this client was so
upset that I just spent the rest of today ’s session
letting him talk about it instead of addressing his
health behaviors ’).
Discussion
This study represents an effort to systematically
characterize the types of modifications that are made to
interventions when they are implemented in real world
settings. On a high level, two of the major categories ofcoding mapped onto Castro and colleagues ’distinction
between modifications of program content, and modifica-
tion of the form of delivery ( e.g., location of delivery, deliv-
ery person, or channel of delivery) [27]. In a sample of
studies described in peer-reviewed articles, which repre-
sent a variety of interventions and contexts, we found thatcontextual modifications were occasionally reported,
but that content modifications were reported much
more frequently. Tailoring the intervention to addresslanguage, cultural differences, literacy, or situational
constraints was the most commonly identified content
modification, followed by the addition or removal ofelements and changes to the length or pacing of the
intervention.
Other modifications identified in our coding process,
such as drift and loosening of structure, occurred rela-
tively rarely within the articles that we reviewed. This
low frequency in the current sample is not surprising, assuch behaviors are unlikely to occur in a planned
manner, and may be less likely to be emphasized when
describing an evidence-based intervention in a peer-reviewed article. Furthermore, relatively few of the arti-
cles that were sampled employed the type of observation
or stakeholder interviews through which such behaviorsmay be identified. While drift might also be considered a
discontinuation of the intervention entirely or a lack of
fidelity rather than a modification, it also seems import-ant to capture it in a system designed to classify devia-
tions from and modifications to a protocol in order to
better measure its impact on outcomes of interest. Forexample, the impact of the option to occasionally or
strategically drift on clinician or client satisfaction may
be important to explore, in addition to the impact ofdrift on clinical effectiveness.
In contrast to the findings in Hill and colleagues ’study
[20], most of the articles that we found in our searchprocess described modifications that were made pro-
actively in recognition of key differences between the
implementation setting and the original intervention. Inanother report, we describe findings that emerged when
we applied this framework to interview data from a sam-
ple of community-based mental health service providerswho were trained in an EBP [53]. Several of the lower-
frequency modifications identified in the current study
were endorsed much more frequently in that study,suggesting that modifications made proactively may dif-
fer from those made once implementation is underway.
Thus, at this stage of development, we determined thatit is important to represent a more exhaustive set of pos-
sible modifications in the classification system.
As the discussion above indicates, some modifications
may signify decreases in fidelity, while others may be
consistent with the design of the intervention. The ten-
sion between modification and fidelity is a critical issuein implementation science [4,54,55]. Many recognize
that modifications will occur throughout the course of
an implementation effort, but the type and extent ofmodifications that can occur without compromising ef-
fectiveness or degrading fidelity to an unacceptable de-
gree has not been sufficiently explored. In theory, it ispossible to make some types of modifications without
compromising effectiveness or removing the key ele-
ments of an intervention. However, for some interven-tions, the core elements have not yet been determined
empirically, and very little is known about the impact of
behaviors such as integrating other interventions or se-
lectively implementing particular aspects of a treatment.
Fidelity measures that emphasize competence or thespirit of an intervention over adherence may not ad-
equately capture some potentially important types of
modification, and those that emphasize adherence maynot capture modifications such as tailoring. Thus, when
observation or reliable self-report is possible, the use of a
fidelity measure along with this modification frameworkcan guide decisions regarding the extent to which a par-
ticular modification represents a departure from core ele-
ments of an intervention. Used alone or as a complementto fidelity measures, this measure may also be useful inStirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 9 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
determining whether particular elements can be removed,
re-ordered, integrated or substituted without compromis-
ing effectiveness.
Despite the breadth of the coding system we developed,
interrater agreement for the subset of independently-
coded articles was quite high, reaching standards of ‘sub-
stantial agreement ’and ‘almost perfect ’agreement for the
level and nature of modifications, respectively [52]. Within
our research group, this level of reliability was achievedafter a brief series of hour-long weekly coding meetings,
suggesting that our coding scheme can be used to reliably
classify modifications described in research articles with-out overly burdensome training.
We note several potential limitations to the study and
framework. First, our search process was not intended toidentify every article that described modifications to
evidence-based interventions, particularly if adaptation
or modification was not a major topic addressed in thearticle. Instead, we sought to identify articles describing
modifications that occurred across a variety of different
interventions and contexts and to achieve theoreticalsaturation. In the development of the coding system, we
did in fact reach a point at which additional modifications
were not identified, and the implementation experts whoreviewed our coding system also did not identify any new
concepts. Thus, it is unlikely that additional articles would
have resulted in significant additions or changes to thesystem.
In our development of this framework, we made a
number of decisions regarding codes and levels of cod-ing that should be included. We considered including
codes for planned vs. unplanned modifications, major vs.
minor modifications (or degree of modification), codesfor changes to the entire intervention vs. changes to spe-
cific components, and codes for reasons for modifica-
tions. We wished to minimize the number of levels ofcoding in order to allow the coding scheme to be used
in quantitative analyses. Thus, we did not include the
above constructs, or constructs such as dosage or inten-sity, which are frequently included in frameworks and
measures for assessing fidelity [56]. Additionally, we in-
tend the framework to be used for multiple types of data
sources, including observation, interviews and descrip-
tions, and we considered how easily some codes mightbe applied to information derived from each source.
Some data sources, such as observations, might not
allow coders to discern reasons for modification or makedistinctions between planned and unplanned modifica-
tions, and thus we limited the framework to character-
izations of modifications themselves rather than how orwhy they were made. However, sometimes, codes in the
existing coding scheme implied additional information
such as reasons for modifying. For example, the numer-ous findings regarding tailoring interventions for specificpopulations indicate that adaptations to address differ-
ences in culture, language or literacy were common.
Aarons and colleagues offer a distinction of consumer-driven, provider-driven, and organization-driven adapta-
tions that might be useful for researchers who wish to
include additional information regarding how or whyparticular changes were made [35]. While major and
minor modifications may be easier to distinguish by con-
sulting the intervention ’s manual, we also decided
against including a code for this distinction. Some inter-
ventions have not empirically established which particular
processes are critical, and we hope that this frameworkmight ultimately allow an empirical exploration of which
modifications should be considered major ( e.g., having a
significant impact on outcomes of interest) for specificinterventions. Furthermore, our effort to develop an ex-
haustive set of codes meant that some of the types of
modifications, or individuals who made the modifications,appeared at fairly low frequencies in our sample, and thus,
their reliability and utility require further study. As it is
applied to different interventions or sources of data,additional assessment of reliability and further refinement
to the coding system may be warranted.
An additional limitation to the current study is that
our ability to confidently rate modifications was im-
pacted by the quality of the descriptions provided in the
articles that we reviewed. At times, it was necessary tomake some assumptions about how things were actually
modified, or the level at which the modifications oc-
curred. The level of detail available in records, clinicalnotes, or other qualitative data that may be utilized to
investigate modifications may similarly impact future
investigations. We attempted to address this limitationby making decision rules about the level of detail and
clarity required to assign codes and by documenting
these rules in detail in our coding manual. The level ofrater agreement that we achieved suggests that our
process was reasonably successful, despite occasional
ambiguities in the descriptions. In future efforts toutilize this system, two strategies can minimize the likeli-
hood that insufficient data are available to assign codes.
Whenever possible, observation by raters knowledgeable
about the intervention and its core components should
be used to identify modifications. This may be especiallyimportant in differentiating minor modifications (which
might be coded as ‘tailoring/tweaking/refining ’) from
more intensive modifications (which, for example, mightbe coded as ‘removing elements ’); ultimately, making
these distinctions requires a thorough knowledge of the
intervention itself. When interviews are conducted inlieu of observation or in addition to review of existing
records, we recommend asking very specific follow-up
questions regarding modifications that are made. Familiar-ity with both the intervention and the coding system whenStirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 10 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
interviewing can increase the likelihood that sufficient in-
formation is obtained to make an appropriate judgment.
Despite these measures, interrater reliability may varyacross different data sources, although additional work by
our research group suggests that reliability remains high
when the coding scheme is applied to interview data [53].We are currently examining reliability when the coding
scheme is used for observation using audio recordings of
psychotherapy sessions as well, and we recommend thatwhen using this framework, researchers assess reliability.
We believe that the framework that we present can be
used flexibly depending on the goals of the research andthe type of data collection that occurs. For example, re-
searchers may wish only to code exclusively for content
or context-level modifications if they are interested indetermining the impact of specific types of modifications
on health outcomes. Similarly, the code for the decision
maker may not be necessary if researchers are studyingmodifications made by one particular group or evaluating
adaptations that were pre-specified by a single decision-
maker before implementation began. However, this codemight be very informative if the researchers wish to under-
stand the impact of the nature and process of modification
on outcomes such as stakeholder engagement or fidelityto core program or intervention elements.
This coding system may be used to advance research
that is designed with the goal of understanding the impactof changes made to interventions in particular contexts.
Ultimately, such an understanding will require simultan-
eous use of this coding scheme and treatment outcome as-sessments, in order to help researchers and clinicians
determine what specific types of modifications are most
useful in increasing the effectiveness of interventions.Such an understanding will allow stakeholders to make
more informed decisions about whether and how to mod-
ify the interventions when implementing them in contextsthat differ from those in which they were originally devel-
oped and tested. Additionally, when used in the context of
fidelity monitoring, this system can provide more usefulinformation about what actually occurs when lower levels
of adherence are identified, as well as the types of modifi-
cations that can occur within acceptable levels of fidelity.
Baumann and colleagues suggested that there is a range of
feasible fidelity, as well as a point of ‘dramatic mutation, ’
at which the intervention is no longer recognizable or ef-
fective [8]. This system of characterizing modifications
may be useful in determining these ranges and boundarieswith greater specificity. By understanding the types of mod-
ifications that can be made while keeping the intervention
o u to ft h er a n g eo fd r a m a t i cm u t a t i o n ,s t a k e h o l d e r sm a yu l -timately find it easier to adapt interventions as needed
while attending to an intervention ’s most critical compo-
nents. Investigations of the impact of particular types ofmodifications on clinical outcomes can further informefforts to implement evidence-based interventions while pre-
serving desired levels of effectiv eness. Finally, another potential
area of investigation using this framework is on the impact ofspecific modifications on impl ementation outcomes such as
adoption and sustainability. Additional knowledge about
these critical issues in implemen tation science will yield im-
portant guidance for those wishing to advance the imple-
mentation of evidence-based programs and interventions.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Authors ’contributions
SWS conceptualized the study, contributed to the data collection andcoding, and was the predominant contributor to this article. CM assistedwith data analyses, assessment of reliability, interpretation of results, and
contributed to the text of the manuscript. KT and AC assisted with literature
searches, codebook development, and coded articles in the study. Allauthors did critical reading and modification of drafts and approved the finalmanuscript.
Acknowledgments
The preparation of this article was supported through funding from theNational Institute of Mental Health (R00 MH 01800) [Dr. Stirman]. At the timethat this study was being conducted, Dr. Stirman was a Fellow at the
Implementation Research Institute (IRI), at the George Warren Brown School
of Social Work, Washington University in St. Louis, which is funded throughan award from the National Institute of Mental Health (R25 MH080916-01A2)and the Department of Veterans Affairs, Health Services Research &
Development Service, Quality Enhancement Research Initiative (QUERI). We
wish to thank Jennifer Gamarra and Andrea DeVito for their assistance withthe preparation of this manuscript. The content is solely the responsibility ofthe authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the
National Institute of Mental Health, the National Institutes of Health, or the
Department of Veterans Affairs.
Author details
1Women ’s Health Sciences Division, National Center for PTSD, Boston, MA,
USA.2VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA.3Department of
Psychiatry, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.4Department of Psychiatry,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.5VA Center for
Organization, Leadership and Management Research, Boston, MA, USA.
6Department of Psychology, University of Massachusetts Boston, Boston, MA,
USA.
Received: 18 September 2012 Accepted: 29 May 2013
Published: 10 June 2013
References
1. Lundgren L, et al:Modifications of evidence-based practices in
community-based addiction treatment organizations: a qualitative
research study. Addict Behav 2011, 36(6):630 –635.
2. Schoenwald SK, et al:Toward the effective and efficient measurement of
implementation fidelity. Adm Policy Ment Health 2011, 38(1):32 –43.
3. Waltz J, et al:Testing the Integrity of a Psychotherapy Protocol:
Assessment of Adherence and Competence. J Consult Clin Psychol 1993,
61(4):620 –630.
4. Stirman SW, et al:The sustainability of new programs and interventions:
A review of the empirical literature and recommendations for future
research. Implementation Sci 2012, 7:17.
5. Zvoch K: Treatment fidelity in multisite evaluation. Am J Evaluation 2009,
30(1):44 –61.
6. Dusenbury L, et al:A review of research on fidelity of implementation:
implications for drug abuse prevention in school settings. Health Educ
Res2003, 18(2):237 –256.
7. Schoenwald SK GA, Chapman JE, Frazier SL, Sheidow AJ, Southam-Gerow
MA:Toward the effective and efficient measurement of implementation
fidelity. Administration Policy Mental Health and Mental Health Serv Res 2011,
38(1):32 –43.Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 11 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
8. Bauman LJ, Stein REK, Ireys HT: Reinventing fidelity: the transfer of social
technology among settings. Am J Community Psychol 1991, 19(4):619 –639.
9. Kelly JA, et al:Transfer of research-based HIV prevention interventions to
community service providers: fidelity and adaptation. AIDS Educ Prev
2000, 12:87–98.
10. Elliot DSMS: Issues in disseminating and replicating effective prevention
programs. Prev Sci 2004, 5(1):47 –53.
11. Levitt JT, et al:The flexible application of a manualized treatment for
PTSD symptoms and functional impairment related to the 9/11 World
Trade Center attack. Behav Res Ther 2007, 45(7):1419.
12. Galovski TE, et al:Manualized therapy for PTSD: Flexing the structure of
cognitive processing therapy. J Consult Clin Psychol 2012, 80(6):968 –981.
13. Kalichman SC, et al:Culturally tailored HIV-AIDS risk-reduction messages
targeted to African-American urban women:impact on risk sensitization
and risk reduction. J Consult Clin Psychol 1993, 61(2):291 –295.
14. Kennedy MG, et al:The effect of tailoring a model HIV prevention program
for local adolescent target audiences. AIDS Educ Prev 2000, 12(3):225 –238.
15. Stanton B, et al:The complex business of adapting effective interventions to
new populations: an urban to rural transfer. JA d o l e s cH e a l t h 2005, 37(163):17 –26.
16. Kumpfer KLAR, Smith P, Bellamy N: Cultural sensitivity and adaptation in
family-based prevention interventions. Prev Sci 2002, 3(3):241 –246.
17. Kaysen D, et al:Adaptation of cognitive processing therapy for treatment of torture
victims: Experience in Kurdistan, Iraq. Psychological Trauma 2013, 52(2):184 –192.
18. Salerno A, et al:Wellness self-management: an adaptation of the illness
management and recovery program in New York State. Psychiatr Serv
2011, 62(5):456 –458.
19. Leerlooijer JN, et al:The world starts with me: using intervention
mapping for the systematic adaptation and transfer of school based
sexuality education from Uganda to Indonesia. TBM 2011, 1(2):331 –340.
20. Hill LG, Maucione K, Hood BK: A focused approach to assessing program
fidelity. Prev Sci 2007, 8:25–34.
21. Nastasi BK, et al:The participatory intervention model: a framework for
conceptualizing and promoting intervention acceptability. School
Psychology Quarterly 2000, 15(2):207 –232.
22. Tortolero SR, et al:Using intervention mapping to adapt an effective HIV,
sexually transmitted disease, and pregnancy prevention program for
high-risk minority youth. Health Promot Pract 2005, 6(3):286 –298.
23. Devieux JG, et al:Cultural adaptation in translational research: field
experiences. J Urban Health 2005, 82(2 Suppl 3):iii82 –iii91.
24. Goldstein NE, et al:Guidelines for adapting manualized interventions for
new target populations: a step ‐wise approach using anger management as
am o d e l . Clin Psychology: Science and Practice 2012, 19(4):385 –401.
25. Lau AS: Making the case for selective and directed cultural adaptations
of evidence-based treatments: examples from parent training. Clin
Psychology: Science & Practice 2006, 13(4):295 –310.
26. Aarons G, et al:Dynamic adaptation process to implement an evidence-
based child maltreatment intervention. Implementation Science 2012, 7(32).
27. Castro FG, Barrera M Jr, Martinez CR Jr: The cultural adaptation of
prevention interventions: Resolving tensions between fidelity and fit.
Prev Sci 2004, 5(1):41 –45.
28. Scheirer MA: Linking Sustainability Research to Intervention Types.
Am J Public Health 2013, 103(4):e73 –e80.
29. Glaser BG, Strauss AL: The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for
Qualitative Research. Chicago, IL: Aldine Publishing Company; 1967.
30. Strauss A, Corbin J: Basics of qualitative research. Techniques and procedures
for developing grounded theory ; 1998.
31. Cohen J: Weighted kappa: Nominal scale agreement provision for scaled
disagreement or partial credit. Psychol Bull 1968, 70(4):213 –220.
32. Hinton DEPT, Tran M, Safren SA, Otto MW, Pollack MH: CBT for Vietnamese
refugees with treatment-resistant PTSD and panic attacks: a pilot study.
J Trauma Stress 2004, 17(5):429 –433.
33. McCabe KMYM, Garland AF, Lau AS, Chavez G: The GANA program: a
tailoring approach to adapting parent child interaction therapy for Mexican
Americans. Education & Treatment of Children 2005, 28(2):111 –129.
34. Webster-Stratton C, Reid M: Adapting the Incredible Years Child Dinosaur
Social, Emotionalm and problem Solving Intervention to Address
Comorbid Diagnoses. J Child Serv 2008, 3(3):17 –30.
35. Aarons G, et al:Adaptation happens: a qualitative case study of implementation
of the incredible years evidence-based parent training program in a residential
substance abuse treatment program.
JC h i l dS e r v .i np r e s s .36. McIntyre LL: Adapting Webster ‐Stratton's incredible years parent training
for children with developmental delay: findings from a treatment group
only study. J Intellect Disabil Res 2008, 52(12):1176 –1192.
37. Owczarzak J, Dickson-Gomez J: Provider Perspectives on Evidence Based
HIV Prevention Interventions: Barriers and Facilitators to Implementation.
AIDS Patient Care STDS 2011, 25(3):171 –179.
38. Lyon AR, et al:Easier Said Than Done: Intervention Sustainability in an
Urban After School Program. AdministrationPolicy Mental Health and
Mental Health Serv Res 2011, 38(6):504 –517.
39. Malow RM, et al:Increasing access to preventative health care through
cultural adaptation of effective HIV prevention interventions: a brief
report from the HIV prevention in haitain youths study. ABNF J 2004,
132:127 –132. November/December.
40. Devieux JG, Malow, Robert M, Rosenberg, Rhonda, Dyer, Janyce G: Context
and common ground: cultural adaptation of an intervention for minority
HIV Infected individuals. J Cult Divers 2004, 11(2):49 –59.
41. Dushay RA, et al:Lowering HIV risk among ethnic minority drug users:
comparing culturally targeted intervention to a standard intervention.
Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse 2001, 27(3):501 –524.
42. Miller RL: Adapting an evidence-based intervention: tales of the hustler
project. AIDS Educ Prev 2003, 15(1):127 –138.
43. Nastasi BK, et al:Participatory model of mental health programming:
Lessons learned from work in a developing country. School Psychology
Review 1998, 27(2):260 –276.
44. Hasson H, Blomberg S, Duner A: Fidelity and moderating factors in complex
interventions: a case study of a continuum of care program for frail elderly
people in health and social care. Implementation Science 2012, 7(23).
45. Williams RB, Williams VP: Adaptation and implementation of an evidence
based behavioral medicine program in diverse global settings: the
Williams life skills experience. TBM 2011, 1(2):303 –312.
46. Blasinsky M, Goldman HH, Unutzer J: Project IMPACT: A report on barriers
and facilitators to sustainability. Administration Policy Mental Health and
Mental Health Serv Res 2006, 33(6):718 –729.
47. Melde C, Esbensen F-A, Tusinski K: Addressing Program Fidelity Using
Onsite Observations and Program Provider Descriptions of Program
Delivery. Eval Rev 2006, 30(6):714 –740.
48. Remien RH, et al:Moving From Theory to Research to Practice:
Implementing an Effective Dyadic Intervention to Improve Antiretroviral
Adherence for Clinic Patients. Acquiring Immune Definciency Syndrome
2006, 43(1):S69 –S78.
49. Noonan R, et al:Adoption, Adaptation, and Fidelity of Implementation of
Sexual Violence Prevention Programs. Health Promot Pract 2009, 10(1):59S –70S.
50. Webster-Stratton C, Reid MJ: Adapting The Incredible Years, an evidence-
based parenting programme, for families involved in the child welfare
system. J Child Serv 2010, 5(1):25 –42.
51. Holliday J, et al:High Fidelity? How should we consider variations in the
delivery of school based health promotion interventions? Health Educ J
2009, 68(44).
52. Landis JR, Koch GG: The measurement of observer agreement for
categorical data. Biometrics 1977, 33(1):159 –174.
53. Stirman SW, et al:Modifications made to cognitive therapy by
community mental health providers: Implications for effectiveness and
sustainability. Psychiatr Serv 2013 (in press).
54. Shediac-Rizkallah MC, Bone LR: Planning for the sustainability of community-
based health programs: conceptual frameworks and future directions for
research, practice and policy. Health Educ Res 1998, 13(1):87 –108.
55. Scheirer MA, Dearing JW: An agenda for research on the sustainability of
public health programs. Am J Public Health 2011, 101(11):2059 –2067.
56. Bishop DC, et al:Measuring Fidelity and Adaptation: Reliability of a Instrument for
School-Based Prevention Programs. Evaluation & The Health Professions; 2013.
doi:10.1186/1748-5908-8-65
Cite this article as: Stirman et al. :Development of a framework and
coding system for modifications and adaptations of evidence-based
interventions. Implementation Science 2013 8:65.Stirman et al. Implementation Science 2013, 8:65 Page 12 of 12
http://www.implementationscience.com/content/8/1/65
