health psychology report · volume 3(3), 5
original article
background
In high income countries in Europe and North America, 
early identification and intervention for autism spectrum 
disorders (ASD) have been linked to improved long-term 
outcomes. However, in most low and middle income coun-tries (LMIC) little is known about the use or availability of such services, which limits the ability of policy and devel-opment planning. The purpose of the present study was to assess the use of ASD services in a number of cities in Vietnam, an Asian LMIC, in order to identify areas within 
the field that should be specifically targeted to improve 
ASD services in Vietnam.
participants and procedure
Surveys were conducted in six different cities across Viet-nam with 90 parents/caregivers of children with ASD, 115 professionals working with children with ASD, and 10 di-
rectors of agencies providing ASD services. The parents/
caregivers’ survey assessed demographics and information regarding their child’s symptoms and services the child received. The professionals’ survey assessed their demo-graphic and professional background, the ASD services they provide, and their perspective on the quality of ASD services at their agency. The directors’ survey included 
these same questions as well as additional questions re-
garding the operation of the agency.
results
Early identification and intervention ASD services are 
available in Vietnam, at least in major cities. However, 
there is a lack of well-trained professionals, the tools used 
for evaluation and diagnosis are limited, outdated and un-
standardized, and the quality of services is questionable. 
Most importantly, a  scientific evidence base for services is absent, and the country lacks an official governmental 
policy for supporting children with ASD.
conclusions
Research directly assessing the quality of ASD services in 
Vietnam is needed. Most importantly, efforts at facilitat-
ing governmental policy and support advocacy are needed 
to increase the likelihood that families and children with 
ASD will receive appropriate and effective services.
key words
ASD; early intervention; early identification; autism; VietnamCong Van Tran
1 · A,B,C,D,E,F,G
Bahr Weiss
2 · C,D,E,F
Toan Nang Khuc
3 · A,B,G
Thu Thi Le Tran
3 · A,B,G
Trang Thi Nha Nguyen
4 · A,B,G
Hoa Thi Kim Nguyen
5 · A,B,G
Thuy Thi Thu Dao
5 · A,B,G
Early identification and intervention services  
for children with autism in Vietnam
organizations – 1: Vietnam National University, Hanoi, Vietnam · 2: Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, USA · 
3: Hanoi National University of Education, Hanoi, Vietnam · 4: VinSchool, Hanoi, Vietnam · 5: Vietnam Institute  
of Educational Sciences, Vietnam
authors’ contribution – A: Study design · B: Data collection · C: Statistical analysis · D: Data interpretation ·  
E: Manuscript preparation · F: Literature search · G: Funds collection
corresponding author – Cong Van Tran, Ph.D., Vietnam National University, School of Education, 144 Xuan Thuy Road, 
Cau Giay District, Hanoi, Vietnam, e-mail: congtv@vnu.edu.vn
to cite this article – Tran, C. V., Weiss, B., Khuc, T. N., Tran, T. T. L., Nguyen, T. T. N., Nguyen, H. T. K., & Dao, T. T. T. 
(2015). Early identification and intervention services for children with autism in Vietnam. Health Psychology Report, 3(3), 191–200. DOI: 10.5114/hpr.2015.53125
received 05.05.2015 · reviewed 05.06.2015 · accepted 16.07.2015 · published 31.07.2015
Cong Van Tran, 
Bahr Weiss,  
Toan Nang Khuc,  
Thu Thi Le Tran,  
Trang Thi Nha 
Nguyen,  
Hoa Thi Kim 
Nguyen,  
Thuy Thi Thu Dao192
health psychology reportBackground
Autism, more formally known as “autism spectrum 
disorders” (ASD) (American Psychiatric Association, 2013), is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder that begins very early in life. It involves a triad of impair-
ments including delay and deviance in (a) social in-
teraction and relationships, (b) communication and language, and (c) restricted interests and repetitive behaviors (Faja & Dawson, 2006). The specific caus-es of ASD have not yet been identified, but there is strong evidence that to a  large degree genetic fac-tors underlie its development in many but likely not all cases (Roberts & Prior, 2006). It is clear that autism generally is present at birth or shortly there-
after, with professionals able to diagnose children 
with ASD as young as two years of age (i.e., Stone 
et al., 1999; Lord, 1995) or even 18 months (Saman-
go-Sprouse et al., 2014).
Autism spectrum disorders can range from very 
mild (with little need for external support) to very severe (American Psychiatric Association, 2013). Children with mild ASD may be able to develop cop-
ing strategies that essentially control the secondary 
effects of their ASD symptoms. However, in part be-cause of its core deficits in social communication and social interaction, ASD often is highly debilitating, severely impacting an individual’s overall life func-tioning (Russell, 1997; Shattuck et al., 2012; Eaves & Ho, 2008). Some studies (e.g., Bailey, Hatton, Mesi-
bov, Ament, & Skinner, 2000) have reported that indi-
viduals with ASD have more difficulties in all aspects of living than any other mental health disability (e.g., intellectual disabilities).
The apparent prevalence rate of autism has in-
creased significantly since the earliest epidemiologic studies were conducted in the late 1960s and early 1970s, when studies in Europe and the U.S. suggested a prevalence of around 1 in 2,500 children (Gillberg 
&  Wing, 1999); by the 2000s, prevalence estimates 
from large surveys were 1-2% (Lai, Lombardo, & Bar-on-Cohen, 2013; Schieve et al., 2012). Most recently a study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC) in 2010 reported that the overall prevalence of ASD at the U.S. ADDM sites was 14.70 per 1,000 (one in 68) children aged 8 years. Autism spectrum disorders prevalence estimates varied across sites from 0.0057 
to 0.0219, and also by sex and racial/ethnic group. 
Globally, an ASD prevalence estimate of about 1% is generally accepted (Blumberg et al., 2013).
To help children with ASD it is essential to focus 
on the earliest years of development, as early learn-ing powerfully affects the child’s future life course due to the significance of the impairments associat-ed with ASD (Roberts & Prior, 2006). Small amounts of relative improvement in early childhood can have a substantial impact on a child’s later adulthood func-tioning (Woods & Wetherby, 2003), with a large body 
of research indicating that early identification and intervention can change the development trajectory of children with ASD (Matson &  Minshawi, 2006). 
Thus, early identification has become “best practice”, 
since it helps families gather information about their 
child’s disorder and needs, and to begin treatment 
(Volkmar & Pauls, 2003). Early intervention is critical for preventing the cascade of effects in which early 
deficits impair later functioning.
A  number of assessment tools are available for 
early identification (e.g., the CHAT [Checklist for 
Autism in Toddlers]; the updated M-CHAT; Robins, Barton, & Green, 2001; Robins & Dumont-Mathieu, 
2006; Robins, 2008). However, although there is 
strong research supporting the reliability and validi-ty of these measures, most of this research has been 
conducted in high income countries (HIC) such as 
those in Western Europe, the U.K., the U.S., etc. Simi-
larly, most of the research regarding the effectiveness 
of early intervention for ASD has been conducted in HIC, where the programs are well structured, sup-
ported by the government, and focus on the use of 
evidenced-based methods (Samms-Vaughan, 2014). 
In contrast, in low and middle income countries 
(LMIC) where the majority of the world’s population lives, there has been relatively little research and de-
velopment of valid tools and interventions for ASD 
(Daley, 2002).
The present study focuses on Vietnam, an Asian 
LMIC of about 93 million people. As with most LMIC, relatively little is known in Vietnam about the sup-
port services available for individuals with ASD. 
Some small surveys, primarily students’ dissertations 
or master’s theses, more generally focused on intel-
lectual disability than on ASD per se, have assessed early identification and intervention services in dif-
ferent centers and schools in Vietnam (Tran, 2015). 
The little research directly focusing on autism con-
ducted in Vietnam has been mostly published in Viet-
namese in conferences proceedings, and is not avail-able more broadly to the global mental health field, 
which limits its ability to support ASD in Vietnam 
through the global health movement. In one of the 
few studies published in an English language journal, 
Vu, Whittaker, Whittaker, and Rodger (2014) reported that within Vietnam, ASD is culturally and socially 
constructed as a ‘karmic demerit’ or ‘family problem’ 
rather than a lifelong developmental disorder need-ing support from the government. They also found 
that parents of children with ASD had little access to 
services for their children. A related factor that neg-
atively affects families’ access to early identification 
and intervention services is social awareness. Even primary school teachers and medical students have 
limited understanding of ASD (Trinh & Tran, 2014; Vu 
& Tran, 2014). In a non-data-based review published 
in the Vietnamese Journal of Social Sciences, Nguy -
Early 
identification and intervention services193
volume 3(3), 5en (2012) discussed some important aspects of ASD 
evaluation and diagnosis in Vietnam, commenting that 
major limitations in regard to ASD services included 
the unavailability of standardized diagnostic tools, and 
a lack of specific national standards for professionals. 
In the Ho Chi Minh City Sciences Journal, Le (2014) 
discussed the ASQ (Ages and Stages Questionnaire) 
screening tool and how it can be used for early iden-
tification and intervention for children with special needs. However, both articles were theoretical, with-
out empirical data. Overall, there has not been empir-ical study of support services available for individuals 
with ASD in Vietnam. The purpose of the present study 
thus was to assess the practices of early identification 
and intervention for children with ASD in Vietnam, an 
important step for improving service quality for this 
population. Because ASD is not considered a disability by the Vietnamese, such research identifying the needs 
of families with a child with ASD will be important for 
raising the awareness of policy makers of the strong 
need for services. In addition, at present in training 
programs for special education, school psychology, 
early childhood education, etc. in a number of different 
universities in Vietnam, ASD has been identified as an 
important area that students should study. Thus, in-
formation regarding various stakeholders’ perceptions 
about ASD services will be very useful to help guide 
and improve these ASD training programs.
Partici Pants and P rocedure
SiteS , participantS , and recruitment
Ten participating agencies were selected from six cities in Vietnam (Hanoi, Bac Ninh, Phu Yen, Hai 
Phong, Ninh Binh, and Danang) that represented ma-
jor urban areas in the northern and central regions of the country. A convenience sample was used, with 
agencies providing ASD services identified based on 
the authors’ professional networks, which included 
primary, secondary, and tertiary education, mental 
health and psychology, and medicine. Agency di-
rectors were contacted and the study discussed with 
them. All directors were interested in participating, 
and were sent packets including the study descrip-
tion, consent forms, a  package of questionnaires, 
etc. Agency directors distributed invitation letters, 
consents forms, and survey packages to interested 
professionals in the agency and interested families 
receiving services at the agency. Study participants included 90 parents/caregivers (hereafter referred to 
as ‘caregivers’), 115 professionals, and 10 site direc-tors from these ten participating agencies. The av-
erage age of caregivers was 34 years, and 59% were 
female. As is typical in Vietnam (Weiss et al., 2014), 
the large majority (92%) of caregivers were married. Participant characteristics are reported in Table 1. The study was approved by the U.S. FWA IRB #18223 
at Vietnam National University.
inStrumentS
Items for the survey were adapted from the New York State Department of Early Intervention (1999) 
Table 1
Participant characteristics
Caregivers
Age (years)
Female
Marital status
marriedsingledivorcedseparated
Education
graduated high school or lowerbachelor degreemaster or higher
Occupational status
full timepart-timeunemployed
Relationship to childM = 34 (SD = 5.43), 
range: 23-49
60%
92%
2%
5%1%
31%
51%
18%
70%
16%14%
97% parents
Children (with ASD)
Age (years)
FemaleM = 5.29 (SD = 2.79), 
range: 2-17
12%
Professionals
Age (years)Female
Years working in ASD fieldEducation
community college degreebachelor’s degreemaster’s degreeM = 30.82 (SD = 9.21), 
range: 22-65
86%
M = 6.06 (SD = 7.50)
15%
57%
18%
Agency directors
Age
Female
Years’ experience as 
director
Education
community college 
degree
bachelor’s degreemaster’s degreeM = 31 (SD = 7.42), 
range: 23-49
90%
M = 2.40 (SD = 0.97), 
range: 1-6
10%
80%
10%
Note. ASD – autism spectrum disorders
Cong Van Tran, 
Bahr Weiss,  
Toan Nang Khuc,  
Thu Thi Le Tran,  
Trang Thi Nha 
Nguyen,  
Hoa Thi Kim 
Nguyen,  
Thuy Thi Thu Dao194
health psychology reportstudy. Items for ASD symptoms were adapted from 
M-CHAT. Content validity was assessed based on ICD/DSM criteria through a review conducted by a re-search team that included both Vietnamese and U.S. professionals. Three meetings that discussed the con-tent of each item and the three scales relative to ICD/DSM criteria were conducted. Items and scales went through several revisions before data collection began. Internal consistency for all scales used in the survey was acceptable or better, ranging from .73 to .93.
Caregivers’ Survey. The caregivers’ survey as-
sessed demographic information about themselves and their child with ASD, and the ASD services that the child had received as well as caregivers’ evalu-ation of those services. Caregivers also reported on this child’s ASD (and related behavioral problems such as aggression) symptoms, focusing on the three classical ASD symptom domains (American Psychi-atric Association, 2000; World Health Organization, 2002): impaired language, impaired social interac-tions, and stereotyped behaviors and interests. Care-givers rated their child’s improvement in language, motor skills, social interactions skills, etc., since be-ginning ASD services, on a Likert scale ranging from 1 (not at all improved) to 5 (greatly improved).
Professionals’ Survey. The professionals’ survey 
assessed their demographic and professional back-ground (e.g., education, work experience), the ser-vices provided at their agency, and their perspective regarding the quality of services at their agency.
Directors’ Survey. The directors’ survey similarly 
assessed their perspective on the services provided by their agency, and the professionals providing the services as well as their perceptions about the opera-tion of the agency.
results
child characteriSticS  and SymptomS
Children’s age at receiving their ASD diagnosis ranged from 17 months to 8 years, with the mean age at diagnosis of 2.56 years (30.63 months, SD = 15.40).  
The majority of children (66%) started their inter-vention before the age of 3, with 32% starting inter-vention between 3 and 6 years old, and 2% starting when older than 6. Most children (81%) received their diagnosis at a  pediatric hospital, with 14% of children receiving their ASD diagnosis at a private center, and 4% never having received an official di-agnosis (although they started receiving intervention services from their agency). Among those who were diagnosed, 46% of children were given their ASD diagnosis by a  specialized medical doctor (usually a psychiatrist), 26% by psychology staff, 24% by a pe-diatrician, and 4% by teachers.
Table 2 lists the ASD and related symptoms re-
ported by caregivers. The most frequently reported symptom was delayed or no language (77%), and the least frequently reported symptom was self-stimula-tion behaviors (18%). Table 3 reports the percentages of children lacking symptoms in 1 or more key ASD symptom domains (language impairment; social re-Table 2
Caregivers’ report of their child’s autism spectrum 
disorders symptoms
Symptoms %
Delayed or no language 77
Lack of ability to start and maintain conversations76
Hyperactive, inattentive 73
Unable to establish social relationships 71
Deficient in non-verbal communication (eye contact, facial expression, etc.)63
Lack of emotional and social interac-tions63
Stereotyped or repetitive behaviors 63
Not sharing own interests, activities, etc. with others61
Doesn’t engage in pretend or role play-ing games61
Uses abnormal and repetitive language 57
Playing with toys monotonously/incor-rectly56
Preoccupied with parts of objects in-stead of whole56
Little or no joint attention 50
Overly attached to objects or routines 41
Over-sensitive to certain sensory stimuli (e.g. sound, smell)39
Abnormal dietary habits 36
Aggressive / violent behaviors 29
Afraid of strange places, people 29
Self-stimulation (e.g. auditory, visual) 18Table 3
Percentage of children lacking symptom in autism 
spectrum disorders domain
A. Language impairment 8%
B. Social relationship / interaction im-pairment16%
C. Stereotyped behaviors and interests 11%
One or more domain (A, B and/or C) 26%
Early 
identification and intervention services195
volume 3(3), 5lationship/interaction impairment; stereotyped be-
havior and interests). Over 25% of the caregivers’ reports for their child labeled as having ASD did not include one or more key ASD symptom domains. Eight percent of children were not reported to have any language impairment, 16% were not reported to have any social relationship/interaction impairment, and 11% were not reported to have any stereotyped behaviors or interests, although these are all key criterion domains for ASD. In regard to related be-havioral problems, 73% of caregivers reported that their children were “hyperactive or inattentive”, and 29% reported that their child had “aggressive/violent behaviors”.
Table 4 reports caregivers’ evaluation of the im-
provement they had seen in their child’s ASD symp-toms since beginning services, on a 1 (not at all im-proved) to 5 (very improved) scale. The mean for most domains was near the mid-point on the scale, with the domain with the highest level reported im-provement being motor skills (M = 3.16), and the two areas with the lowest level of reported improvement being adaptive skills (M = 2.44) and social interaction skills (M = 2.29).
characteriSticS  of profeSSionalS   
and agencieS
Among the sample of professionals, 72% were inter-vention teachers (similar to special education teach-ers in high income countries), 13% psychology staff, 5% social workers, and 1% medical doctors, with the rest holding non-health related degrees. The majority of professionals had a bachelor’s degree (57%), with 18% with a master’s degree or higher, and 15% with a  community college (3-year) degree. Forty-three percent of professionals worked at a Special Educa-tion Center (schools specifically for children with developmental disabilities), and another 43% worked at a Psychology Support Center (which the focus on mental health problems more broadly rather than only on developmental disabilities). The mean num-ber of children receiving services at their agencies was 29, ranging from 8 to 60 children. All sites provid-ed full-day treatment, 88.90% also provided individual session intervention (i.e., the child came to the center for 1-2 hours/day for treatment) and 33.30% provided home-based intervention; only 10.00% provided inclu-sive education services (i.e., non-diagnosed children also attended classes).
As part of their surveys, professionals and agen-
cy directors were asked about difficulties faced in providing effective services for families and chil-dren with ASD in Vietnam. “Facility difficulties” (i.e., problems with the physical space or resources at the center) were most frequently selected as a major dif-ficulty (see Table 5). Perhaps not surprisingly, pro-fessionals and agency directors differed in regard to professionals’ low salary as a major difficulty (with 50% vs. 30% of the two groups respectively selecting this as a major difficulty). Perhaps reflecting their dif-Table 4
Caregiver ratings improvement in autism spectrum dis­
orders (ASD) symptoms since beginning ASD services
Domains of improvement M (SD)
Motor skills 3.13 (1.47)
Intellectual and cognitive skills 3.08 (1.42)
Academic and learning skills 3.03 (1.10)
Behavioral problem solving skills 2.97 (1.15)
Language 2.71 (1.43)
Adaptation skills 2.44 (1.37)
Social interaction skills 2.29 (1.34)
Note. Likert scale ranged from 1 (not at all improved) to  
5 (greatly improved).
Table 5
Professionals’ and agency directors’ evaluation of challenges in providing effective autism spectrum disorders 
service
% professionals selecting % directors selecting
Inadequate governmental policy 25 60
Lack of parental collaboration 39 10
Lack of well-trained teachers/therapists 44 60
Lack of standardized programs 44 40
Lack of valid, culturally appropriate tools 46 40
Financial difficulties (professionals’ low salary) 50 30
Facility difficulties 56 70
Lack of experts 57 30
Cong Van Tran, 
Bahr Weiss,  
Toan Nang Khuc,  
Thu Thi Le Tran,  
Trang Thi Nha 
Nguyen,  
Hoa Thi Kim 
Nguyen,  
Thuy Thi Thu Dao196
health psychology reportferent roles in ASD services, 60% of agency directors 
saw a lack of government policy as a major difficulty, whereas only 25% of professionals did.
autiSm Spectrum diSorderS  ServiceS
As part of their survey, caregivers reported the amount of time per week that their child received ASD ser-vices, which was on average about 25 hours of ASD services per week. Table 6 lists the ASD evaluation and planning tools that professionals reported using. Most notably, none of the ASD tools generally regard-ed in HIC as being of the highest validity (i.e., ADOS; Lord et al., 2000; ADI-R; Lord, Rutter, & Le Couteur, 1994; Rutter, Le Couteur, & Lord, 2003) were reported being used by any of the Vietnamese professionals. Ta-ble 7 lists parents’ report of the assessment approach-es used to evaluate their child’s ASD. Most notable in these data is the fact that 18% of the children did not receive a behavioral evaluation, which is essential for correct ASD diagnosis and evaluation. Table 8 lists the early intervention services reported by professionals to have been provided to children with ASD. Most no-table in this table is that 10% of professionals reported providing psychoanalysis to children with ASD.
In their survey the caregivers were asked to evalu-
ate the quality of the services their child received and related factors (e.g., governmental policy). Similar to  
the agency directors, the area that caregivers saw as the weakest was governmental policy. The areas that they saw as the strongest were the expertise and profession-alism of the agency and service providers (see Table 9).
discussion
This is one of the first studies in Vietnam examin-ing early identification and intervention services for families and children with ASD, and there appear to be several positive aspects. Most children receiving services at the participating centers were identified relatively early, with the median age below 3 years, which is positive given that early identification and intervention services are a  key factor in successful intervention with ASD (Woods &  Wetherby, 2003; GorDon, 2009; Camarata, 2014). It is important to note, of course, that although perhaps representative of Vietnamese children actually receiving ASD ser-vices (given that there are few ASD centers outside the major urban areas we sampled; Nguyen, 2013), our sample certainly is not representative of children with ASD in Vietnam in general: Given (a) interna-Table 6
Tools used by professionals to assess autism spectrum 
disorders
Tool %
Small Steps 53
Denver-II 50
CHAT / M-CHAT 49
CARS 39
ASQ 37
PEP-R 36
Raven 32
ABS-S:2 27
WISC-III/IV 24
PEP-3 24
Note. Denver-II – Denver II Developmental Screening Test;  
(M-)CHAT – (Modified) Checklist for Autism in Toddlers; CARS – Childhood Autism Rating Scale; ASQ – Ages & Stages Ques-tionnaire; PEP-R (or 3) – Psychoeducational Profile-Revised  
(or Third Edition); Raven – Raven’s Progressive Matrices ABS-S:2 – Adaptive Behavior Scale-School: 2; WISC-III/IV – Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children – Third Edition/Fourth Edition.
Table 7
Caregiver report of approaches used to assess autism 
spectrum disorders
Assessment approach %
Evaluation of pregnancy, birth and post-birth history31
Evaluation of family history 18
Evaluation of birth defects or physical injuries14
Behavioral evaluation 86
Psycho-neurology (e.g. EEG) evalua-tion22
Biological / medical tests (blood, urine, etc.)8Table 8
Autism spectrum disorders intervention approaches 
reported used by professionals
%
Psychoanalysis 10
Medication and medical intervention 13
Physical therapy 24
Sensory and motor therapy 67
Cognitive behavior therapy 68
Inclusive education 77
Speech therapy 83
Behavior therapy 87
Early 
identification and intervention services197
volume 3(3), 5tional ASD prevalence rates of approximately 1%,  
(b) the overall Vietnamese population of approxi-
mately 93 million, and (c) the relatively small number 
of sites providing ASD services in Vietnam (Nguyen, 
2013), the vast majority of children in Vietnam with ASD undoubtedly are not receiving any services, ear-
ly or otherwise. In regard to the representativeness 
of our sample more generally, the median level of ed-
ucation in Vietnam is about the 8
th grade (Weiss et 
al., 2014), whereas in our sample the median educa-tion was about two years of college. The likely effect 
of this is that our parents were more knowledgeable 
about autism than the typical parent in Vietnam with 
a child with autism (Tran, 2015).
It is encouraging that caregivers reported that their 
child with ASD was receiving a moderate number of hours of services per week, on average about 25, which 
suggests that in Vietnam children with ASD who 
are receiving services receive a  reasonable amount.  
It also is encouraging that caregivers reported small  
to moderate levels of improvement in their child’s ASD symptoms across various domains. Although 
these are of course not objective observations and it 
is not possible to attribute actual change in the child’s functioning to the intervention since there were no 
comparison groups, the statistics are nonetheless en-
couraging. Generally speaking, as reported in Table 9, caregivers reported that the quality of the services that 
their child was receiving was fair to good.
Other aspects of our results were less encourag-
ing, however. Over 25% of the caregivers’ reports on 
their child’s ASD symptoms lacked one or more key ASD symptom domain (American Psychiatric Associ-
ation, 2000; World Health Organization, 2002), raising 
the question of whether their child actually had ASD 
and questioning the validity of the diagnosis and the 
competency of the individuals who provided the diag-nosis. A related concern is that 16% of the caregivers 
reported that as part of their ASD assessment their 
child did not receive a behavioral evaluation, which 
is a central and necessary component of an ASD as-
sessment (Filipek et al., 2000; Johnson & Myers, 2007). Furthermore, most of the assessment tools that the 
professionals reported using are outdated and have 
not been adapted, validated, and standardized for 
Vietnam, with the exception of the WISC-IV (Dang, 
Weiss, Pollack, & Nguyen, 2011). It is also concerning that 10% of professionals reported using psychoanal-
ysis with children with ASD: Psychoanalysis has not 
been found to be more effective than placebo treat-
ment conditions for any mental health disorder (Her-
bert, Sharp, &  Gaudiano, 2003), and the likelihood of psychoanalysis providing benefit for a  complex 
neuro-developmental disorder such as autism is low. 
Over 2/3 of the professionals reported using cogni-tive-behavioral therapy (CBT) with children with 
ASD. Although CBT has been found to be effective 
for a range of mental health problems such as anxiety and depression (e.g., Sze & Wood, 2008; Wood et al., 
2008), there is little evidence regarding its utility with children with ASD. Cognitive-behavioral therapy is 
highly verbal, involving complex interpersonal com-
munication and analysis, and thus probably would not be appropriate for individuals with ASD (Ames & Weiss, 2013). On the other hand, over 80% of the professionals did report using behavioral therapy and 
speech therapy, which are two central forms of inter-
vention for ASD, in their work with individuals with ASD (Green et al., 2006; Sallows & Graupner, 2005).
Another limitation for ASD services in Vietnam is 
the level of training among the professionals and agen-cy directors. Less than 20% of the professionals and 10% of the agency directors had a  master’s degree or higher. Although effectively implementing a behavioral Table 9
Caregivers’ evaluation of their child’s autism spec­
trum disorders services, and factors impacting on their child’s services
M (SD)
Government policies supporting ASD services2.64 (1.33)
Scientific and systematic base of ASD evaluation3.14 (1.12)
Diversity and appropriateness of ASD interventions3.18 (0.98)
Comprehensiveness of informa-tion for parents3.18 (1.03)
Reliability and validity of ASD diagnosis 3.22 (1.01)
Scientific and systematic base for ASD intervention3.23 (1.02)
Effectiveness of ASD intervention 3.24 (0.93)
Methods for collaborating with parents3.26 (1.07)
Educational environment of the agency3.27 (1.01)
Effectiveness of ASD agencies’ support for families3.33 (1.06)
ASD agencies’ professionalism 3.36 (1.08)
Degree/education and experience of ASD assessment providers3.39 (1.06)
ASD intervention service provid-ers’ professionalism3.50 (1.06)
Degree/education and experience of ASD therapists/teachers3.54 (1.08)
Note. Ratings were made on a 1 (very poor) to 5 (very good) scale; ASD – autism spectrum disorders.
Cong Van Tran, 
Bahr Weiss,  
Toan Nang Khuc,  
Thu Thi Le Tran,  
Trang Thi Nha 
Nguyen,  
Hoa Thi Kim 
Nguyen,  
Thuy Thi Thu Dao198
health psychology reportintervention (BI) plan for children with ASD does not 
require a graduate degree, at least in high income coun-tries developing an effective BI plan often does (Hamad, 
Serna, Morrison, & Fleming, 2010). The fact that only 
10% of professionals worked in agencies that provided inclusive education services also is a limitation, given 
the importance of children with ASD interacting with 
non-diagnosed peers (Harrower & Dunlap, 2001).
In this study, caregivers and professionals and 
agency directors identified what they believed to be the most serious obstacles or challenges to providing 
effective services for children with ASD in Vietnam. 
Agency directors most frequently identified facility 
difficulties (i.e., limitations in the physical infrastruc-
ture of the agency), a lack of governmental policy, and a lack of well-trained therapists and teachers as major 
obstacles. In the major urban areas from which our 
participants were recruited, because of the rapid ur-banization that Vietnam is undergoing costs of land 
and hence rent can be quite high (Cuong, 2011), yet 
median national income, which controls what typi-
cal families can pay for services, is low (Weiss et al., 
2014). Thus, it is difficult for ASD centers to afford appropriate physical facilities with sufficient space, 
technical tools, access to outdoor spaces for play, etc. 
A  closely linked policy challenge, identified by the 
agency directors and caregivers as problematic, is 
the lack of formal governmental designation of “au-tism” as a disability (Vu et al., 2014), the consequence 
of which is that the national health insurance, which 
covers about 90% of Vietnamese citizens, does not 
cover ASD services. Similar to the directors, the pro-
fessionals also most frequently identified facility diffi-culties, as well as a lack of experts, as major obstacles. 
The lack of experts probably reflects the fact that in 
order for professionals to receive effective ASD train-
ing, it is almost always necessary to have foreign ex-
perts travel to Vietnam to provide the training, which is challenging logistically as well as financially.
There are several strengths and weaknesses of 
the study that should be considered in order to most 
appropriately interpret our results. The fact that the 
study included caregivers, professionals and site di-rectors from six different cities and 10 different agen-
cies was a major strength, in that our results do not 
simply reflect the situation at a single agency or in a single city or region as has the very small existing 
literature in this area. This study intentionally did not 
survey sites outside the major urban areas, as there 
are few ASD agencies in the non-urban areas of Viet-
nam. However, the most serious limitation of the study, which also represents an important direction 
for future research, is the lack of objective evaluation 
of the quality of the services provided. Although care-
givers generally appeared to view the services posi-
tively, the actual quality of the services is unclear, and there are reasons to have concerns. Another limita-
tion of this study has to do with sample size, which consisting of 90 parents is quite small. However, this 
is the first study in Vietnam assessing ASD services 
to be published in an international, English language 
journal, so it still has some value for the field.
Given the limited state of autism services in Viet-
nam, a convenience sample was used with agencies 
selected based on the research team’s network. The research team includes researchers and lecturers from a national research institute (the Institute of Ed-ucational Sciences) and a leading, national university (Vietnam National University). Because there is no national registry or licensure for health-related ser-vices in Vietnam at present, this unfortunately likely is the most realistic way to access private agencies in this field in Vietnam. In all likelihood, the effect 
of this sampling would be to increase the quality of 
the services provided, given that the agencies iden-tified are probably relatively well established. Final-
ly, the fact that as many as 10% of the professionals 
would consider it appropriate to use psychoanalysis 
with children with ASD is concerning. And although CBT is appropriate for many emotional and behav-ioral mental health disorders, it would generally not be considered as a primary therapy for ASD; the fact that over 2/3 of the professionals reported using it with children with ASD raises concerns about the professionals’ understanding of ASD and CBT.
An important focus for future research thus will 
be the objective assessment of the ASD services that children receive in the major urban areas of Vietnam. 
This can either be done through knowledge tests for 
providers, but most effectively through direct obser-vation and objective ratings by trained coders of the services that agencies provide (Chevron & Rounsav-ille, 1983). In addition, basic research and develop-ment of culturally valid assessment instruments, and evaluation of intervention programs through ran-domized designs, will be essential.
Ultimately, though, what will be necessary to in-
crease the quality and quantity of services will be a change in governmental policy, to recognize ASD as 
a serious disability, services for which should be sup-
ported by the government. This will require additional 
research documenting the impaired functioning asso-
ciated with children with ASD in Vietnam. This will 
also require research on how best to set up systematic 
and collaborative services among medicine, education, 
psychology and social work, and assess the influence of culture, family, and society on children with ASD in Vietnam, so that early identification and intervention services for ASD can be as effective as possible.
References
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders (4
th ed., 
text rev.). Washington, DC: Author.
Early 
identification and intervention services199
volume 3(3), 5American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). 
Washington, DC: Author.
Ames, M., &  Weiss, J. (2013). Cognitive behaviour 
therapy for a child with autism spectrum disorder 
and verbal impairment: a  case study. Journal of 
Developmental Disabilities, 19, 61-69.
Bailey, Jr, D. B., Hatton, D. D., Mesibov, G., Ament, N.,  
& Skinner, M. (2000). Early development, temper-
ament, and functional impairment in autism and 
fragile X syndrome. Journal of Autism and Devel­
opmental Disorders, 30, 49-59.
Blumberg, S. J., Bramlett, M. D., Kogan, M. D., 
Schieve, L. A., Jones, J. R., &  Lu, M. C. (2013). Changes in prevalence of parent-reported autism 
spectrum disorder in school-aged U.S. children: 
2007 to 2011–2012. National Health Statistics Re­
ports, 65, 1-11.
Camarata, S. (2014). Early identification and early in-
tervention in autism spectrum disorders: Accurate 
and effective? International Journal of Speech­Lan­
guage Pathology, 16, 1-10.
Center for Disease Control and Prevention. (2014). 
Prevalence of autism spectrum disorders – Au-tism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 14 sites, United States, 2010. MMWR 
2014, 63 (No. SS-2).
Chevron, E. S., & Rounsaville, B. J. (1983). Evaluating 
the clinical skills of psychotherapists: A compari-
son of techniques. Archives of General Psychiatry, 
40, 1129-1132.
Cuong, N. V. (2011). Can Vietnam achieve the mil-
lennium development goal on poverty reduction 
in high inflation and economic stagnation? The 
Developing Economies, 49, 297-320.
Daley, T. C. (2002). The need for cross-cultural re-
search on pervasive developmental disorders. 
Transcultural Psychiatry, 39, 532-551.
Dang, H. M., Weiss, B., Pollack, A., & Nguyen, M. C. 
(2011). Adaptation of the Wechsler Intelligence 
Scale for Children-IV (WISC-IV) for Vietnam. Psy­
chological Studies, 56, 387-392.
Eaves, L. C., & Ho, H. H. (2008). Young adult outcome 
of autism spectrum disorders. Journal of Autism 
and Developmental Disorders, 38, 739-747.
Faja, S., & Dawson, G. (2006). Early Intervention for 
Autism. In: J. Luby (ed.), Handbook of preschool 
mental health: Development, disorders, and treat­ment (pp. 388-416). New York City: Guilford Press.
Filipek, P. A., Accardo, P. J., Ashwal, S., Baranek, G. T.,  
Cook, Jr., E. H., Dawson, G., Gordon, B., Gra- 
vel, J. S., Johnson, C. P., Kallen, R. J., Levy, S. E., 
Minshew, N. J., Ozonoff, S., Prizant, B. M., Rapin, I.,  
Rogers, S. J., Stone, W. L., Teplin, S. W., Tuch- man, R. F., & Volkmar, F. R. (2000). Practice pa-
rameter: screening and diagnosis of autism: Re-port of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of 
the American Academy of Neurology and the 
Child Neurology Society. Neurology, 55, 468-479.Gillberg, C., & Wing, L. (1999). Autism: Not an ex-
tremely rare disorder. Acta Psychiatrica Scan­
danavia, 99, 399-406.
GorDon, D. (2009). Early intervention in autism. Neu­
rology Now, 5, 23-26.
Green, V. A., Pituch, K. A., Itchon, J., Choi, A., 
O’Reilly, M., & Sigafoos, J. (2006). Internet sur-vey of treatments used by parents of children 
with autism. Research in Developmental Disabil­
ities, 27, 70-84.
Hamad, C. D., Serna, R. W., Morrison, L., & Fleming, R.  
(2010). Extending the reach of early intervention training for practitioners: A preliminary investigation 
of an online curriculum for teaching behavioral inter-
vention knowledge in autism to families and service providers. Infants & Young Children, 23, 195-208.
Harrower, J. K., & Dunlap, G. (2001). Including chil-
dren with autism in general education classrooms 
a review of effective strategies. Behavior Modifica­
tion, 25, 762-784.
Herbert, J. D., Sharp, I. R., & Gaudiano, B. A. (2003). 
Separating fact from fiction in the etiology and treatment of autism: A  scientific review of the 
evidence. The Scientific Review of Mental Health 
Practice, 1, 23-43.
Johnson, C. P., & Myers, S. M. (2007). Identification 
and evaluation of children with autism spectrum 
disorders. Pediatrics, 120, 1183-1215.
Lai, M. C., Lombardo M. V., & Baron-Cohen, S. (2013). 
Autism. Lancet, 383, 896-910.
Le, H. T. M. (2014). ASQ – A screening tool for de-
tecting and early intervention for children with special needs. HCMC Sciences Journal, 31, 218-226.
Lord, C. (1995). Follow-up of two-year-olds referred 
for possible autism. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 36, 1365-1382.
Lord, C., Risi, S., Lambrecht, L., Cook, E. H., Leven-
thal, B. L., DiLavore, P. C., Pickles, A., & Rutter, M.  
(2000). The Autism Diagnostic Observation 
Schedule–Generic: A standard measure of social 
and communication deficits associated with the 
spectrum of autism. Journal of Autism and Devel­
opmental Disorders, 30, 205-223.
Lord, C., Rutter, M., & Le Couteur, A. (1994)., Autism 
Diagnostic Interview Revised: A revised version of a diagnostic interview for caregivers of individu-
als with possible pervasive developmental disor-
ders. Journal of Autism and Developmental Disor­
ders, 24, 659-685.
Matson, J. L., & Minshawi, N. F. (2006). Early inter­
vention for autism spectrum disorders: A  critical 
analysis. Amsterdam: Elsevier Ltd.
New York State Department of Health, Early Inter-
vention Program. (1999). Clinical practice guide­
line: Report of the recommendations. Autism/per­
vasive developmental disorders, Assessment and intervention for young children (age 0­3 years). Al-
bany, NY: NYS Department of Health.
Cong Van Tran, 
Bahr Weiss,  
Toan Nang Khuc,  
Thu Thi Le Tran,  
Trang Thi Nha 
Nguyen,  
Hoa Thi Kim 
Nguyen,  
Thuy Thi Thu Dao200
health psychology reportNguyen, A. N. T. (2012). Some basic issues in ASDs 
diagnosis in Vietnam. VNU Journal of Social Sci­
ences, 28, 143-147.
Nguyen, Y. H. T. (2013). Overview of care, rehabilitating, 
and education for children with ASD. Paper present-
ed at the national symposium “Autism in Vietnam: 
Health and Educational Practices and Prospect”. 
March 12-13th 2013, Hanoi, Vietnam, 3-10.
Roberts, J. M. A., & Prior, M. (2006). A review of the re­
search to identify the most effective models of prac­tice in early intervention of children with autism 
spectrum disorders. Brisbane, Australia: Australian 
Government Department of Health and Ageing.
Robins, D. L. (2008). Screening for autism spectrum dis-
orders in primary care settings. Autism, 12, 537-556.
Robins, D. L., Barton, M., & Green, J. A. (2001). The 
modified checklist for autism in toddlers: An initial 
study investigating the early detection of autism 
and pervasive developmental disorders. Journal of 
Autism and Developmental Disorders, 31, 131-144.
Robins, D. L., & Dumont-Mathieu, T. M. (2006). Early 
screening for autism spectrum disorders: update 
on the modified checklist for autism in toddlers 
and other measures. Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics, 27, 111-119.
Russell, J. (1997). Autism as an executive disorder. New 
York City: Oxford University Press.
Rutter, M., LeCouteur, A., & Lord, C. (2003). Autism 
Diagnostic Interview – Revised manual. Los Ange-les, CA: Western Psychological Services.
Sallows, G. O., & Graupner, T. D. (2005). Intensive be-
havioral treatment for children with autism: Four-year outcome and predictors. Journal Information, 110, 417-438.
Samango-Sprouse, C. A., Stapleton, E. J., Aliabadi, F.,  
Graw, R., Vickers, R., Haskell, K., Sadeghin, T., Jameson, R., Parmele, C. L., &  Gropman, A. L. (2014). Identification of infants at risk for autism spectrum disorder and developmental language delay prior to 12 months. Autism, 19, 327-337.
Samms-Vaughan, M. (2014). The status of early 
identification and early intervention in autism 
spectrum disorders in lower- and middle-income 
countries. International Journal of Speech­Lan­
guage Pathology, 16, 30-35.
Schieve, L. A., Rice, C., Yeargin-Allsopp, M., Boyle, C. A.,  
Kogan, M. D., Drews, C., &  Devine, O. (2012). 
Parent-reported prevalence of autism spectrum 
disorders in US-born children: An assessment of 
changes within birth cohorts from the 2003 to the 
2007 National Survey of Children’s Health. Mater­
nal and Child Health Journal, 16, 151-157.
Shattuck, P. T., Narendorf, S. C., Cooper, B., Sterz- 
ing, P. R., Wagner, M., & Taylor, J. L. (2012). Post-
secondary education and employment among youth with an autism spectrum disorder. Pediat­rics, 129, 1042-1049.Stone, W. L., Lee, E. B., Ashford, L., Brissie, J., Hep-
burn, S. L., Coonrod, E. E., & Weiss, B. H. (1999). 
Can autism be diagnosed accurately in children under 3 years? Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 40, 219-226.
Sze, K. M., & Wood J. J. (2008). Enhancing CBT for 
the treatment of autism spectrum disorders and concurrent anxiety. Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapy, 36, 403-409.
Tran, C. V. (2015). The causes and current situation 
for children with developmental disorders in Viet-nam. In: Policy for children with developmental disorders (pp. 4-13). Hanoi, Vietnam: World Vision International.
Trinh, H. T., & Tran, C. V. (2014). Misperception of au-
tism spectrum disorder among senior students in mental health care majors in Vietnam. Conference book “Mental health in school settings”, organized by Young Psycho­educational Talent Fund June 2014 
(pp. 159-175). HCMC VNU Publishing House.
Volkmar, F. R., & Pauls, D. (2003). Autism. Lancet, 362, 
1133-1141.
Vu, H. S., Whittaker, A., Whittaker, M., & Rodger, S. 
(2014). Living with autism spectrum disorder in Hanoi, Vietnam. Social Science &  Medicine, 120, 
278-285.
Vu, T. V., &  Tran, C. V. (2014). Hanoi kindergarten 
teachers’ attitude towards autism spectrum dis-order. Conference book “Mental health in school 
settings”, organized by Young Psycho­education­al Talent Fund June 2014. HCMC VNU Publishing house (pp. 486-496).
Weiss, B., Dang, M., Trung, L., Nguyen, M. C.,  
Thuy, N. T. H., &  Pollack, A. (2014). A  national-ly-representative epidemiological and risk factor assessment of child mental health in Vietnam. International Perspectives in Psychology: Research, Practice, Consultation, 3, 139-153.
Wood, J. J., Drahota, A., Sze, K. M., Har, K., Chiu, A., 
& Lange, D. A. (2008). Cognitive behavioral ther-apy for anxiety in children with autism spectrum disorders: A randomized, controlled trial. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 50, 224-234.
Woods, J. J., & Wetherby, A. M. (2003). Early identifi-
cation of and intervention for infants and toddlers who are at risk for autism spectrum disorder. Lan­guage, Speech, and Hearing Services in Schools, 34, 
180-193.
World Health Organization. (2002). Manual of the In­
ternational Statistical Classification of the Diseases and Related Health Problems (10
th ed.). Geneva: 
World Health Organization.
