Planning for, implementing and 
assessing the impact of health promotion and behaviour change interventions: a way forward for health psychologists  
Wallace, L.M. , Brown, K. and Hilton, S.  
 
Author post -print (accepted)  deposited in CURVE March 2014  
 Original citation  & hyperlink :  
Wallace, L.M. , Brown, K. and Hilton, S. (2014) Planning for, implementing and assessing the impact of health promotion and behaviour change interventions: a way forward for health psychologists. Health Psychology Review, vo lume 8 (1): 8 -33. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2013.775629
 
 Note:  
Additional supplemental material is available 
from https://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open/items/5bcc13f5 -b1f7 -4528 -ad13 -0f240cce472c/1/
 
  
Publisher statement: This is an electronic version of an article published in He alth 
Psychology Review, 8 (1), pp. 8 -33. Health Psychology Review is available online 
at: http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17437199.2013.775629 . 
 
 Copyright © and Mor al Rights are retained by the author(s) and/ or other copyright 
owners. A copy can be downloaded for personal non- commercial research or study, 
without prior permission or charge. This item cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively from without first obta ining permission in writing from the copyright holder(s). The 
content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any format or medium without the formal permission of the copyright holders.  
  This document is the author’s post -print  version of the journal article, incorporating any 
revisions agreed during the peer -review process. Some differences between the published 
version and this version may remain and you are advised to consult the published version 
if you wish to cite from it.   
 
 
  
 
 
CURVE is the I nstitutional Repository for Coventry University  
http://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open   
Navigating healthcare: A qualitative 
study exploring prostate cancer patients' and doctors' experience of consultations using a decision- support 
intervention  
Hacking, B. , Scott, S.E. , Wallace, L.M. , Shepherd, S.C. and 
Belkora, J.  
Author pre-print  (submitted version)  deposited in CURVE March 2014 
 
Original citation  & hyperlink :  
Hacking, B. , Scott, S.E. , Wallace, L.M. , Shepherd, S.C. and Belkora, J. (2014) Navigating healthcare: A qualitative study exploring prostate cancer patients' and doctors' experience of consultations using a decision -support intervention. Psycho -Oncology, volume (in press) . 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pon.3466
 
 Note: Article in press, full citation details will be updated once available.  
 
Publisher statement: This is the pre -peer reviewed version of the following article: Hacking, 
B. , Scott, S.E. , Wallace, L.M. , Shepherd, S.C. and Belkora, J. (2014) Navigating healthcare: A 
qualitative study exploring prostate cancer patients' and doctors' experience of 
consultations using a decision -support intervention. Psycho -Oncology, (in press),  which has 
been published in final form at http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/pon.3466
. 
   
Copyright © and Moral Rights are retained by the author(s) and/ or other copyright 
owners. A copy can be downloaded for per sonal non- commercial research or study, 
without prior permission or charge. This item cannot be reproduced or quoted extensively 
from without first obtaining permission in writing from the copyright holder(s). The content must not be changed in any way or sold commercially in any format or medium 
without the formal permission of the copyright holders.  
 
 This document is the submitted version of the journal article, as originally submitted to 
the journal prior to the peer -review process. Some differences between the published 
version and this version may remain and you are advised to consult the published version 
if you wish to cite from it.  
 
  
 
 
CURVE is the I nstitutional Repository for Coventry University  
http://curve.coventry.ac.uk/open   
1 
 REDRAFT  11/11/13  
 Navigating healthcare:  a qualitative study exploring prostate cancer patients' and 
doctors’ experience of consultations using  a decision support intervention.  
Hacking. B*1, Scott. S.E1,2, Wallace. L.M2, Shepherd. S.C1,2 and Belkora. J. 3 
 
1. Clinical Psychology Office, Department of Clinical Oncology, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. 
2. Applied Centre for Health and Lifestyles Interventions, Coventry University, Coventry, 
England, UK.  
3. Institute for Health Policy Studies,  University  of California, San Francisco, USA  
 
*Corresponding Author: Dr Belinda Hacking. Clinical Psychology Office, Department of 
Clinical Oncology, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh. EH4 2XU.  
Telephone: (0131) 537 3094. Email: Belinda. Hacking@nhslothian.scot.nhs.uk  
 
         
 
2 
 Navigating healthcare : a qualitative study exploring prostate cancer patients' and doctors’ 
experience of consultations using a  decision support intervention. 
Abstract   
Background:  Men with early prostate cancer face preference- sensitive decisions when 
choosing among treatments with similar survival outcomes but different procedures, risks, 
and potential complications. A decision -support intervention, ‘ Decision Navigation’  assists 
men with prostate cancer to prepare a question list (consultation plan) for their doctors , and 
provides them with a consultation summary and audio- recording.  A randomised controlled 
trial of Decision Navigation showed advantages over usual care on quantitative measures 
including confidence in decision making and regret. 
Objective:   To gain a qualitative  understanding of patient and doctor  perspectives on 
Decision Navigation .  
Methods :  Six patients  who received ‘ Decision Navigation’ were purposively selected for 
interview out of 62 RCT participants . All four doctors consulted by Navigated patients  were 
interviewed.  Interview data was analyzed using framework analysis.  
Results:  Patients reported that planning for the consultation helped them to frame their 
questions, enabling them to participate in consultations and take responsibility for making 
decisions. They reported feeling more confident in the decisions made, having a written 
report of the key i nformation and an audio- recording. P atients considered routine information 
relating to side effects was inadequate.  Doctors reported that consultation plans made them 
aware of patients’ concerns, and ensured comprehensive responses to questions posed. 
Doct ors also endorsed implementing Decision Navigation as part of routine care.  
Conclusion:  Results suggest that Decision Navigation facilitated  patients’ involvement in 
treatment decision  making . Prostate patients engaging in preference sensitive decision 
making  welcomed this approach to personalised tailored support.   
3 
 Keywords: Cancer, Prostate, Decisions, Support, Consultations.  
Introduction  
Men with prostate cancer are presented the opportunity of  mak ing ‘preference sensitive 
decisions’ about their treatment, as  no one option is better than the others on all outcomes 
valued by patients  [1]. UK guidance encourages healthcare professionals to support prostate 
cancer patients in making treatment decisions in  line with their personal preferences, and to 
identify the extent to which patients wish to be involved in treatment decision making [2, 3]. 
Sharing decisions about treatment options  involves a two- way exchange of information by 
both patient and doctor . When cancer patients are empowered to assume a more active role 
and make decisions consistent with their preferences, they experience less decision conflict [4], 
 greater satisfaction with the outcome [5]  (including prostate cancer [6] ) and in some 
cases, improved treatment adherence [7] . In practice, shared decision making is inconsistently 
carried out [ 8, 9]. Doctors’ most cited barrier is time constraints, whilst patients often do not 
ask questions due to a concern about their perceive d lack of knowledge or because they do 
not feel comfortable questioning their doctor  [10-13]. 
 The ‘ Decision Navigation’  decision support  intervention facilitates patients’ 
preparation for and involvement in treatment decisions. Navigation integrates three  
evidence based decision support interventions; decision coaching  [11] , question listing  
[15], and the provision of consultation summary letters and audio recordings [1 6].  
 Decision Navigation has a strong evidence base applied to cancer consultations, 
specifically, increasing decision self -efficacy  [17] and decision quality  [18], reducing 
barriers to communication [ 19, 20], increasing question asking by patients during 
treatment consultations  [21] and reducing decisional conflict  [17].  
4 
  
Decision Naviga tion was trialled with newly diagnosed prostate cancer patients in 
Edinburgh, Scotland in a two-arm randomised controlled trial with  a qualitative 
component to triangulate the results and further understand the intervention in its ‘natural context’ . Quantitative analysis  from patient questionnaires taken at three time 
points (baseline, post consultation and six months follow up)  [22] revealed that 
Navigated patients  (n=62) , compared to usual care  patients  (n=52), had significantly 
higher scores in deci sion self -efficacy  after the medical consultation and at 6 month 
follow up, as well as significantly less decisional conflict after  medical  consultation. 
Navigated patients  also experienced significantly less regret 6 months later.  [23]. 
  
This paper reports the results of interview s intended to explore patients’ and doctors’ 
experiences of th is intervention in the real life clinical context of making decisions for 
newly diagnosed prostate cancer.  
 Methods  
 Design: S emi-structured interviews  were conducted with six prostate cancer patients who 
received the Decision Navigation  intervention, and all four  doctors who participated in the 
intervention. Evaluation i nterviews were conducted  three months post medical consultation 
for patients and four weeks after the trial  closure  for doctors.   
 The Decision Navigation Intervention
  
Box 1 below presents the process of the Navigation Intervention.  
5 
 Patients who were randomised into the Navigation arm met with a Navigator to  create 
a question list known as their ‘consultation plan.’ During this meeting a  question 
prompt sheet  (SCOPED)  was used by the Navigator to encourage patients to consider 
the fol lowing categories in relation to their cancer and treatment options; their 
Situation, the Choices available to them, their personal Objectives, preferences and 
goals, the People involved in supporting them, Evaluating their choices against their objectives  and the Decisions that they have made/ need to make, and how involved 
they wish to be in decisions about their care.  
 This consultation plan was  sent to the patients ’ doctor for use  in their consultation to 
facilitate the discuss ion of  treatment options . The Navigator attend ed this consultation 
to take notes and audio record, subsequently posting patients a typed summary and a recording (CD) of their meeting.  
          Navigation was delivered by two research assistants, trained in the intervention by author JB . 
Box 1: The Navigation Intervention  
1. Consultation Planning  
 - Navigator met with the  patient prior to consultation (telephone or face to 
face)  
- Using a question prompt sheet (SCOPED), the patient’s key medical 
questions, concerns and preferences were identified and developed into a 
‘Consultation Plan’ by Navigator, for use in consultation. 
2. Medical Consultation wit h Navigation 
- Consultation Plan was  integrated into the discussion.  
- Navigator accompanied  patient , audio- records consultation and types notes. 
3. Patients are posted an audio- recording (CD) and personalised typed 
summary of their medical consultation.  
  
6 
 Patient sample , recruitment and interview procedure  
Six ‘Navigated’  patients  were purp osively selected in chronological order  by the researcher  
using specific selection criteria ; localised prostate cancer  and having received  the full 
intervention. Patients were invited to participate via the telephone  three m onths after the 
consultation in which a range of treatment  options  (surgery, radiotherapy, active monitoring)  
were considered , providing enough time for completion of treatment and reflection on 
decision s.  
All six participants approached agreed to be interviewed  and were interviewed over  the 
telephone . All interviews were recorded with the patient’s permission and transcribed 
verbatim.  An interview schedule was developed  from previous research evidence [17-21] 
evaluating the impact of Navigation to act as a guide;  this is available on request . Interviews 
explored  patient s’ experiences of Navigation in terms of participation in  medical  
consultations , information received during the consultation , their involvement in decision 
making  and their  experiences  of the process of Navigation.  
 
Doctor s ample , recruitment and interview procedure  
All four doctors  who consulted Navigated patients  were invited to take part in an 
interview to discuss their experience of Navigation  within the clinical context. All 
doctors agreed to be interviewed at four weeks after  the trial’s close.  
All four doctors were interviewed face to face. Interviews were audio recorded 
and transcribed verbatim.  The interview schedule was adapted to reflect the  topics  
addressed with patients.  Interviews explored  doctors’  perception s of Navigated  
patien ts’ participation , involvement in decision making  and information exchange 
within consultations, evaluation of the impact of N avigation materials and  experiences  
regarding the overall clinical relevance and suitability of Navigation.  
7 
 Analysis  
All interview  transcript s were anonymised and analysed using framework analysis  
[24], a matrix -based method for ordering and summarising data  [25]. Patient and 
doctor interview transcripts were analysed sep arately, using the same method. A priori  
themes , defined by the study’s aims and objectives , guided the study analysis  with a 
flexible approach to integrate other themes or concepts that emerged de novo 
throughout the analysis . 
Four researchers (authors SES, SCS, BH, and an independent researcher) independently read all of  the transcripts  to gain familiarity with the data  and met 
regularly to identify  and agree on  themes. To develop a thematic framework the 
process of constant comparison was applied, taking sections of interview data 
and comparing them to the emerging themes. As our samples were small we  
concentrated on findings which clearly emerged in -depth within all the transcripts. All 
researchers ag reed on the final thematic  framework  which was applied to code the 
interview data into charted themes and sub themes. Coding of the data was done 
independently and then agreed on.  Multiple cod ing by the four researchers  
independently and collectively  added  to the comprehensiveness and rigour of the  
identified categories .  
 
Ethical Approval  
Ethical approval was granted by Coventry University and by South East Scotland research ethics committee (reference number: 08/F1102/45).   Results  
8 
 Patient Interviews  
All patients  interviewed were Caucasian , the age range was 61 –75 years old, four 
were living with a partner, and two were not . Three patients were educated to 15  
years , one to 18 years  and two had university education.  All patients had localized 
prostate cancer, t hree patients received radiotherapy, two had  surgery, and one  was 
being monitored for his cancer ( active monitoring ). The mean time of the patient 
interviews was 23 minutes. 
During the analysis  four main themes emerged : Pre paring for and p articipating in 
Consultations , Gathering and Retaining Sufficient and Individualised 
Information from Consultations , Deliberating Options and Making Treatment 
Decisions , Navigator Support .  
 
1. Preparing for and Participating in C onsultations  
Patient Preparation for Consultations  
All patients described how preparing questions prior to the consultation enabled them to disentangle their thoughts and identify what they wanted to ask.  
[Consultation Planning] is  good for sorting out your thoughts and coming up 
with questions you might not have thought about. Patient 4 There were certain issues...that coming at it fresh I would not have been thinking about ... but obviously as part of the discussion with [Navigator] did 
come out. Patient 3  
 
Participating in Consultations  
The consultation plan helped all  patients to  focus on, and address their qu estions 
during the consultation, 
9 
 We made explicit questions that we had written down so we had this sort of 
check list we were able to refer to during the consultation which was useful. Patient 2  
I did feel that the [Consultation Plan]...helped the whole experience because I did feel I knew what I was talking about. Patient 4  
 
2. 
Gathering and Retaining Sufficient and I ndividualise d Information from 
Consultations.  
Information Provision during Consultations  
The majority of the p atients  interviewed  reported  receiving  insufficient detail about 
treatment side effects  they subsequently experienced, despite having discussed 
expected symptoms in the consultation.  
In hindsight it might have been a little more helpful to have had you know …maybe a 
little bit more background as to what you might expect  after surgery . Patient 3  
 Despite this,  patients reported a satisfactory exchange of personalised information  
during the consultation, enhanced by the Consultation Plan 
The fact that he [doctor] had clearly got…a copy of those concerns/questions…that set out my range of issues that I wanted to explore and the fact that he was already aware of those meant you know, clearly he got some answers … before I had asked them, whi ch I found very helpful…I 
didn’t feel as though I was trying to tease information out of him. Patient 3  
 Recalling pertinent treatment information  
10 
 The provision of consultation materials by the N avigator ( consultation summary and 
CD) was reported as beneficial to all patients in assisting their recall of treatment 
information provided during a difficult consultation. 
You never take in all that detail of a meeting like that I don’t think and it’s 
helpful having that disc  [audio CD]  to be able to refer back to. Patient 4.  
When I was told my preferred treatment wasn’t an option, you start going blank and nodding your head and those seconds pass…you know you’re not taking information in … so the [summaries] were useful.’ Patient 2  
 
3. 
Deliberating Options and  Making T reatment D ecisions  
All p atients reported that  the Navigation  materials helped them to  deliberate options. 
I think one of the real benefits I found …was that quite clearly I have done a 360 degree turn and ended up with surgery  .It helped to play [CD] back and sit 
and listen…before we made the final decision.  Patient 3.  
Because of [Navigation] I seem to have gotten to the root of the problem and the decision on the solution. Patient 5.  
Using the  materials enhanced patients ’ confidence in the deci sions reached during the 
consultation, 
Revisiting the consultation through the CD twice gave me a bit of a lift because I felt, well, yes it was positive. It didn’t bring doubts into my mind; it brought a positive feeling that we had done the job at the consultation. Patient 4 
4. 
Navigator Support  
Having a Navigator  present  in the consultatio n made all patients feel supported. 
11 
 I think the consultant did sort of overawe you. It wasn’t a one on one basis it 
was a one on two basis, and that’s where I felt the benefits from [Navigator]’s involvement. Patient 5 
 Subsequently, knowing the Navigator had observed the consultation was reassuring  as 
patients  were able to refer back to the Navigator immediately following the 
consultation. 
It was helpful to have somebody else there to talk to afterwards about what had been said. Patient 2  
 
Having a Navigator to discuss issues with, in combination with the other aspects of 
the intervention, was supportive  during a difficult time .  
The ability to chat to somebody else, the questions [ consultation plan] and the 
[audio] recording, I think those are three pretty important issues for someone who, yeah, literally faces  the issue of cancer and what they are going to do 
about it . Patient 3  
 
Doctor interviews  
The average length of the doctor  interviews was 23 .3 minutes . All four doctors 
interviewed were male. T wo were consultant urologists , two oncology consultants .  
Four main themes emerged from the data: Preparation for the consultations, Discussing Treatments with Patients, Making Treatment Decisions, and Sustainability of Navigation.  
 
1. 
Preparation for the Consultation 
12 
 By preparing questions prior to the consultation, N avigated patients appeared more 
empowered  and ready  to actively participate in the consultation .  
By virtue of the fact that they had thought about it in advance, they were more 
involved [than usual care p atients] . Doctor 4, Oncologist.  
The consultation plans  were beneficial in informing doctors of the patient’s current 
understanding, allowing misunderstandings to be detected and addressed . 
The benefit of having the plan is knowing what the patient is thinking, what he has been told and also having prior knowledge of what a confusing picture he may have. Doctor 2, Urologist.  
The Consultation P lans also clarified the patient’s explicit prefere nces for treatment . 
The usefulness is [knowing] what treatment they are leaning t owards . Is it 
because they are b iased? Is it because they just following herd instinct? Or 
because they heard a friend had it and were told it worked well? That pre -
warning or prior information is clearly useful. Doctor  
2, Urologist.  
 
2. 
Discussing Treatment with Patients  
Doctors reviewed the  patient’s Consultation Plan prior to the consultation. This 
highlighted a conflict between their own and the patient’s priorities for the discussion 
within the treatment consultation.  
What is apparent is that the patient’s priorities may be different…they might have right at the top ‘what about my holiday in September?’…wherea s right at 
the top for me is telling them diagnosis, staging, and treatment options… The 
prioritization is quite s urprising. Doctor 3, Oncologist.  
13 
 Doctors reported referring to the Consultation Plan at t he end of the consultation to 
ensure all sal ient point s had been addressed . 
I would tend to be guided by the conversation…and then go back and use 
[Consultation Plan] as a checklist to make sure we’ve covered everything. Doctor 1, Urologist. 
Keeping to their normal consultation style reassured doctors that all vital treatment 
information was covered.  
I’ve sort of stuck to my style because …it’s sort of a rhythm I’ve followed and to change it would risk missing something out. Doctor  3, Oncologist. 
 
3. 
Making treatment decisions  together  
Doctors felt that p reparing for the consultation using Navigation facilitate d patient  
question asking  during the consultation, a nd enhanced  decision making . 
[Navigation] is allowing the patient, preparing the patient, to know what questions to ask so they can make a satisfactory and better decision.  Doctor 2, 
Urologist.  
One doctor reported that the active participation of patients in the treatment decision fitted with his values as a doctor. 
I would prefer to be challenged by a patient rather than them meekly accepting what I say…I would rather they come in and say ‘tell me why I should have this, tell me why I shouldn’t have that’ . People [need to] come along encouraged…so that they’re not 
coming in beholden with the person opposite . Doctor  1, Urologist.  
 
4. 
Sustainability of Navigation 
Impact of Navigation  
14 
 Doctors reported the  presence of the Navigator as being no different than the patient 
having a family member with them,  
‘It’s no different from having a sister, brother or wife’  Doctor  1, Urologist. 
All described feeling at ease with their consultations being audio -recorded and 
recognised the benefit  of giving patients audio recording of consultations,  
‘...they [patients] won’t remember 90% of what’s said.’ Doctor  1, Urologist .  
 
Opinions on in corporating Navigation into clinical practice. 
Consultants were supportive of implementing Navigation  into clinical practice,  
 [Navigation] should be up there being prioritized with other interventions… I think 
it’s very useful. Doctor 3, Oncologist   
 
Although supportive, clinicians were concerned about the cost involved in 
providing the service,  
Given there’s a salary involved, that unless you have got volunteers…well it will become too expensive. Doctor 1 
 
To mitigate  such  cost clinicians suggested implement ation within current roles 
such as the clinical nurse specialist,  
The cancer nurse specialists could make sure…that each patient could have a 
Dictaphone to take with them…. be given a CD... .you could build in all the benefits 
[of Navigation ] within the fabric of the staff we have. ’ Doctor  1, Urologist. 
 Discussion  
15 
 This paper explore s doctors ’ and prostate  patients ’ experiences of Navigation  through 
interviews to gather data  beyond the restrictions of the quantitative surveys .  As a 
result, we were better able to ascertain the nature of how Navigation worked in a 
clinical setting , how it  enabled patients to feel more confident in their decisions, as 
shown in the main RCT [23] , and the role of the Navigator in the process.  
 All p atients reported  speaking with a Navigator helped them to  disentangle,  identify 
and articulate their main concerns, preferences and questions  for their medical 
consultation. The process of doing this pr ior to the consultation with the support of the 
Navigator meant patients felt prepared and confident to deliberate with the doctor 
about their healthcare choices. This was reflected in the interv iews with doctors who 
explained it was useful to know the patients ’ concerns, preferences and understanding 
before meeting  them. They further identified that through the process of setting their 
questions beforehand patients were more ready to be involved. This is substantiated by the mai n RCT findings [23] which show N avigated patients felt  significantly more 
confident in making a decision than their control counterparts. Navigated  patients  
subsequently  perceived their consultation as  tailored to them and their individual 
situation.  
 The consultation summary and audio recording (CD) were used by patients to help them recall the clinical information provided . Patients recognised how useful this was 
and the possibilities of forgetting important information without it. They  felt reassured 
they could return to their  decisions made during the consultation using the CD and 
summary. This is consistent with other ‘decision coa ching’ interventions for prostate 
16 
 cancer patients  [26] suggesting that such interventions should be offered as standard 
care, particularly in the instance of preference sensitive decisions [1 1].   
 
It is a challenge for every doctor to engage  with both the bio- medical and psycho -
social information  needs of patients  simultaneously [27]. These qualitative results 
indicate how patients can achieve both needs through Navigation, an intervention which also enables doctors to tailor consultations to the individuals’ prioritised concerns. 
Previous clinical evaluation of Navigation [17] in the US found equivalent  results. 
Namely  that Navigation was; endorsed by doctors, helped patients organise and clarify their 
medical questions, provided doctors with a pr eview so they could plan  in advance how to 
conduct the consultation, and additionally helped ensure all patients ’ questions were attended 
to. Our study further found that doctors were surprised by how patients’ priorities were  not 
aligned with their own expectations of the meeting. The consultation plan helped bridg e the 
distance between the patients’  and doctors ’ views and create a shared understanding , a 
necessary component of shared decision making [18] .  
 
When using the model of shared decision making proposed by Charles, Gan fi and 
Whelan [ 28] ‘At Least Two to Tango’ these results appear to facilitate this type of 
decision making. Within this dynamic we incorporated the Navigator as a coach to 
prompt questi on asking and gather information to provide memory aids post 
consultation.  In order for involvement in shared decision making , Charles and 
colleagues [28]  suggest complimentary roles between the doctor and the patient be 
established , recognising the diffi cultly for doctors to know how much information a 
patient wants and why. Patients taking the time with the support of the Navigator to 
create a question list in addition to the doctor reviewing  this list beforehand and using it 
with in the consultation ensu red a conducive atmosphere for both in which to share 
meaningful information to lead to the outcome of a mutually agreed treatment decision.  
17 
 Reflecting on the treatment decision made t he majority of patients reported not feeling prepared for 
the adverse ef fects of treatment , despite these having been discussed in general terms.  This is in line 
with existing evidence which states that men with prostate cancer are surprised by the intensity 
and duration of treatment side effects [ 29]. This may be due to patients not processing  the 
information about potential side effects  provided due to embarrassment about incontinence or 
impotence and anxiety about the impact on social interactions [ 26], or not subsequently 
referring to the memory aids  containing this information .The communication  of side 
effects and how to manage them could therefore be improved.  
 
It is interesting to note for future implementation,  that all doctors found the intended use of 
the con sultation plan as an agenda was not possible. It was realised doctors needed to abide 
by their own rehearsed consultation script to ensure no important safety information was 
omitted. The consultation plan was therefore integrated as a checklist at the end of the meeting.  Nevertheles s, all four doctors were unanimous in support of incorporating aspects of 
Navigation into current practice, specifically the consultation planning and provision of consultation audio recordings. Since the completion of this trial the lead consultant urolog y 
surgeon obtained funding to provide consultation audio recordings to newly diagnosed prostate cancer patients in Edinburgh [27]. It is widely recognised that providing patients with consultation audio ta pes is underused in oncology [30], despite the evidenced benefits of 
providing such a resource to patients [16, 30].
  
 The N avigation model was delivered by trained research ers. Elements of Navigation could be 
provided by usual care clinical staff, or third sector organisat ions as practised in the USA [31, 
32]. The doctors interviewed suggested that clinical nurse specialists could be trained to 
deliver consultation planning sessions to patients, and coordinate the recording of consultations. This could address the potential governance concerns regarding introducing a 
18 
 third party into the healthcare system to deliver Navigation. However, there are potential 
opportunity costs of using time from highly qualified clinical nurse specialists to deliver 
Navigation, so this may not be a satisfactory solution. Syste ms implementing Navigation in 
the USA [3 1, 32]  employ healthcare trainees who gain valuable patient contact experience, 
along with cancer survivors, as Navigators. Future studies sh ould examine N avigation across 
a number of different consultations and alte rnative models of service provision for 
acceptability, effectiveness, economy and sustainability.  
 Limitations  
The main limitation of this study is the small sample size s. Our patient sample size was 
limited by researcher resource constraints, so sampling to saturation of themes was not attempted. Purposive sampling selected men who chose different treatment modalities , and 
the analysis revealed no differences in their exper iences of Navigation.  Only Caucasian 
males were interviewed in this study, reflective of the local population.  In future studies it would be advisable to examine the impact of Navigation in men of different ethnic groups.  All four doctors were interview ed; the maximum number of doctors involved in delivering 
Navigation to patients . The views from a larger sample of  doctors would be welcomed, and 
could be achieved by employing a multi -centred trial of Navigation  
 The authors recognise a larger patient sam ple size would allow for the saturation to reflect the 
diversity within the population. However, w hen the patient qualitative findings are 
considered alongside the quantitative findings of the main RCT [23], they enhance our understanding of the experiences of patients and doctors engaging with Navigation in a clinical setting . Additionally, the similarity between the final themes and findings from other 
empirical studies [17 -21] allows further confidence in our interpretation of the data.  
19 
  
The Navigation i ntervention is solely patient focused. D octors were not directly trained nor 
supported to change their consultation practice. T his did not appear to influence the quality of 
the intervention. The views of the healthcare professionals, such as clinical nurs e specialists 
were not included in the current study as their role is more “on demand” to patients, but future studies could include their perspectives.  
 Conclusion  The Navigation Intervention was well received by this sample of men with prostate cancer and their doctors. The interviews elicited further understanding of participating  
in Navigation, particularly in supporting treatment deliberation and facilitating patient -centred communication within consultations.  Combined with enhanced 
preparation for the consultation, patients felt more engaged and better able to participate in decision making.  Unlike many decision aids which can require time and new skills for c linicians to use confidently [33], much of the effort of Navigation took 
place outside the  consultation between the patient and the Navigator.  
 Decision support interventions which optimally tailor information to the individual patient, accommodating for the variety of patient needs, are essential for patient -
centred decision making to become m ore widespread in clinical practice [3 4]. 
Implementation of Navigation as usual practice will require exploration of affordable and effective delivery models.  
 Declarations of Interest : None . 
Acknowledgments  
20 
 Tish Chalmers participated as a Navigator. Lucy Dickinson undertook project management 
and data collection for the RCT and interviews. Jemma Robinson contributed to data analysis. The Clinical Team working with Prostate Cancer Patients in Edinburgh for the ir 
assistance with recruitment and delivery of the intervention.  
Funding was provided by Macmillan Cancer Support and NHS Lothian Endowment Funds . 
     References  
1. Cooperberg, M. R., Ramakrishna, N. R., Duff, S. B., Hughes, K. E., Sadownik, S., Smith, J. A. and Tewari, A. K. (2012), Primary treatments for clinically 
localised prostate cancer: a comprehensive lifetime cost -utility analysis. BJU 
International. DOI: 10.1111/j.1464- 410X.2012.11597.x 
2. ‘Prostate cancer: diagnosis and treatment’ Clinical guideline s, CG58 -  National 
Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE). Issued: February 2008  
3. NHS Scotland Quality Strategy -  putting people at the heart of our NHS. Scottish 
Government (May 2010); ISBN: 9780755993239  
4. Stacey.D, Saman.R, Bennett.C. Decision Making in Oncology: A Review of Patient Decision Aids to Support Patient Participation. Cancer CA Cancer J Clin 2008; 58: 292-304. DOI: 10.3322/CA.2008.0006.  
5. Kremer H, Ironson G, Schneiderman N, Hautzinger M. “It’s my body”: does patient involvement in decision making reduce decisional conflict? Medical Decision Making (2007). 27(5):522- 32. DOI: 10.1177/0272989X07306782.  
21 
 6. Cassileth BR, Soloway MS, Vogelzang NJ, Schellhammer PS, Seidmon WJ, Hait HI, 
Kennealey GT. Patients' choice of treatment in stage D prostate canc er. Urology (1989); 
33 (5):57- 62. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0090- 4295(89)90108- 8 
7.  Joosten EA, DeFuentes -Merillas L, de Weert GH ST, van der Staak CP, de Jong CA. 
Systematic review of the effects of shared decision -making on patient satisfaction, 
treatment adherence and health status. Psychother Psychosom 2008;77:219- 26. DOI: 
10.1159/000126073. 
8. Hubbard. G, Kidd. L., and Donaghy. E. Preferences for involvement in treatment decision making of  patients with cancer: A review of the literature. European Journal of 
Oncology Nursing (2008).12(4):299- 318. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ejon.2008.03.004
  
9. Gattellari et al., 2001 M. Gattellari, P.N. Butow and M.H.N. Tattersall, Sharing decisions in cancer care. Social Science & Medicine (2001); 52; p1865–1878. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0277- 9536(00)00303- 8
  
10. Frosch DL, May SG, Rendle KA, Tietbohl C, Elwyn G. Authoritarian doctors and patients' fear of being labeled 'difficult' among key obstacles to shared decision making. Health Aff (Millwood) 2012;31(5):1030- 8. DOI: 
10.1377/hlthaff.2011.0576 
11. Roter DL. Patient question aski ng in doctor -patient interaction. Health Psychol 
1984;3(5):395- 409. PMID: 6536496 [PubMed -  indexed for MEDLINE]  
12. Roter DL. Patient participation in the patient- provider interaction: the effects of 
patient question asking on the quality of interaction, sati sfaction and compliance. 
Health Educ Monogr 1977;5(4):281- 315. DOI: 10.1177/109019817700500402 
13. Kinnersley P, Edwards A, Hood K, Ryan R, Prout H, Cadbury N, et al. Interventions before consultations to help patients address their information 
22 
 needs by encour aging question asking: systematic review. BMJ 2008;337:a485. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.a485 
14.  Stacey, D., Murray, M. A., Légaré, F., Sandy, D., Menard, P. and O'Connor, A. (2008), 
Decision Coaching to Support Shared Decision Making: A Framework, Evidence, and Implications for Nursing Practice, Education, and Policy. Worldviews on Evidence -
Based Nursing, 5:  25–35. DOI: 10.1111/j.1741- 6787.2007.00108.x 
15. Butow PN, Dunn SM, Tattersall MHN, Jones QJ. Patient participation in the cancer consultation: evaluation of a question prompt sheet. Annals of Oncology 1994;5:199-204. 
16. Pitkethly M, MacGillivray S, Ryan R. Recordings or summaries of consultations for people with cancer. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 2008, Issue 3. Art. No.: CD001539. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD001539.pub2. 
17. Belkora JK, Loth MK, Chen DF, Chen JY, Volz S, Esserman LJ. Monitoring the implementation of Consultation Planning, Recording, and Summarizing in a breast care center. Patient Educ Couns 2008;73(3):536- 43. DOI: 10.1016/j.pec.2008.07.037. 
18. Sepucha KR, Belkora JK, Tripathy D, Esserman LJ. Building bridges between physicians and patients: results of a pilot study examining new tools for collaborative decision making in breast cancer. J Clin Oncol 2000;18(6):1230-38.  
19. Sepuch a K, Belkora J, Mutchnick S, Esserman L. Consultation Planning to Help 
Patients Prepare for Medical Consultations: Effect on Communication and Satisfaction for Patients and Physicians. Journal of Clinical Oncology 2002;20(11):2695- 2700.  DOI: 10.1200/JCO.2002.10.06 
23 
 20. Belkora JK, Loth MK, Volz S, Rugo HS. Implementing decision and 
communication aids to facilitate patient- centered care in breast cancer: a case 
study. Patient Educ Couns 2009;77(3):360- 8. DOI: 10.1016/j.pec.2009.09.012 
 
21. Belkora JK, Volz S, Teng A, Pass M, Moore DH, Esserman L. Five years of integrating decision and communication aids into routine breast cancer care: an implementation report. In: International Shared Decision Making Conference Proceedings. Maastricht, Netherlands; 2011.  
22.  Lewin.S., Glenton.C., Oxman. A.D. Use of qualitative methods alongside 
randomised controlled trials of complex healthcare interventions: methodological study. BMJ 2009;339:b3496. doi:10.1136/bmj.b3496 
23. Hacking.B., Wallace. L.M., Scott. S.E., Kosmala -Anderson.J., McN eill.S.A., and 
Belkora. J. Testing the feasibility, acceptability and effectiveness of a 'decision navigation' intervention for early stage prostate cancer patients in Scotland - a 
randomised controlled trial. Psychooncology. 2012 May 9. DOI: 10.1002/pon.3093. [Epub ahead of print]  
24. Ritchie, J. and Spencer, E. Qualitative data analysis for applied policy research. In: Bryman, A. and Burgess, R.G. Analyzing Qualitative Data. London: Routledge, Chapter 9.  (1994).  
25. Ritchie. J and Lewis. J. Qualitative Research  Practice: A Guide for Social 
Science Students and Researchers , Sage Publications, Chapter 9 (2003)   
26. Wirrmann , E and Askham . J. Implementing patient decision aids in urology. Picker 
Institute Europe, 2006.  
27. Scott.S.  Hacking. B., Wallace. L.M., Belkora. J. and Shepherd. S.C  Testing the 
feasibility, acceptability and effectiveness of a 'decision navigation' intervention for 
24 
 early stage prostate cancer patients in Scotland -  a randomised controlled trial”. Beyond 
the Abstract on UroToday.com (2013) Available f rom: 
http://www.urotoday.com/index.php?option=com_content&Itemid=830&catid=1134&i
d=56990&lang=en&view=article . 
28. Charles, C., Gafin, A., and Whelan, T. Shared decision- making in the medical 
encounter: What does it mean? (Or it takes at least two to tango). S oc. Sci. Med. 1997, 
44, 5, 681- 692 
29. Talcott JA, Rieker P, Clark JA, Propert KJ, Weeks JC, Beard CJ, Wishnow KI, Kaplan I, Loughlin KR, Richie JP, Kantoff PW. Patient -reported symptoms after primary 
therapy for early prostate cancer: results of a prospective cohort study. J Clin Oncol. 1998; 16: 275–283.  
30. Tattersall MH, Butow PN. Consultation audio tapes: an underused cancer patient information aid and clinical research tool. The Lancet Oncology 2002;  3(7):431- 37. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1470- 2045(02) 00790- 8, 
31. Belkora.J.K.
 , Teng. A., Volz.S., Loth.M.K., and Esserman. L.J Expanding the 
reach of decision and communication aids in a breast care center: A quality improvement study. Patient Education and Counseling. Volume 83, Issue 2, May 2011, Pages 234 -239. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2010.07.003
 
32. Belkora, J., M. Miller, B. Crawford, K. Coyne, M. Stauffer, J. Buzaglo, N. Blakeney, M. Michaels, and M. Golant, Evaluation of question- listing at the 
Cancer Support  Community. Translational Behavioral Medicine. Volume 3, 
Issue 2, pp 162- 171.  
33. Marshall. M., & Bibby. J. Supporting patients to make the best decisions. BMJ 2011;342:d2117 
25 
 34. Feldman -Stewart, D. Brundage,M.D., & Tong C. Information that affects 
patients' trea tment choices for early stage prostate cancer: a review.  Can J Urol. 
2011, 18(6):5998- 6006.  
 
  
