Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=rhpr20
Health Psychology Review
ISSN: 1743-7199 (Print) 1743-7202 (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/rhpr20
Reported theory use in electronic health weight
management interventions targeting young
adults: a systematic review
Taylor Willmott, Bo Pang, Sharyn Rundle-Thiele & Abi Badejo
To cite this article:  Taylor Willmott, Bo Pang, Sharyn Rundle-Thiele & Abi Badejo (2019)
Reported theory use in electronic health weight management interventions targeting
young adults: a systematic review, Health Psychology Review, 13:3, 295-317, DOI:
10.1080/17437199.2019.1625280
To link to this article:  https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1625280
View supplementary material 
Published online: 17 Jun 2019.
Submit your article to this journal 
Article views: 1106
View related articles 
View Crossmark data
Citing articles: 24 View citing articles 

Reported theory use in electronic health weight management
interventions targeting young adults: a systematic review
Taylor Willmott , Bo Pang , Sharyn Rundle-Thiele and Abi Badejo
Social Marketing @ Gri ﬃth, Gri ﬃth Business School, Gri ﬃth University, Queensland, Australia
ABSTRACT
This review assesses the extent of reported theory use in electronic health
weight management interventions targeting young adults aged 18 –35
years. Twenty-four eligible studies were identi ﬁed. Two independent
reviewers extracted data and coded for theory use using the TheoryCoding Scheme. Overall, the mean total use of theory score was 6/23
(SD = 5; Min. = 0, Max. = 17); 17 studies were classi ﬁed as having weak
application of theory, ﬁve as moderate, and two as strong. The majority
(N = 18) of studies mentioned theory, however, most (N = 14) did not
report how intervention techniques related to theoretical base. No studyused theory to select intervention recipients and only four used theory
to tailor intervention techniques to recipients. Limited studies reported
theory testing (N = 6) and no study used intervention results to build
and/or re ﬁne theory. Results indicate that weight-related outcomes may
be enhanced when at least one or more theoretical constructs are
explicitly linked to an intervention technique and when theoretical
constructs are included in evaluations. Increases in theory
application and reporting are needed to assist the scienti ﬁc research
community in systematically identifying which theories work, for whom,how, why, and when; thereby delivering an advanced understanding ofhow best to apply theory to enhance intervention outcomes.ARTICLE HISTORY
Received 26 July 2018
Accepted 26 May 2019
KEYWORDS
Behaviour change; electronic
health; theory; weight
management; young adults
Introduction
Worldwide, the prevalence of overweight and obesity has been exponentially increasing since 1975
(NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, 2016 ). In 2016, more than 1.9 billion adults were overweight or obese,
and of these, over 650 million were obese (NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, 2016 ). Alarmingly, experts
have warned that obesity is far more common than the NCD Risk Factor Collaboration ( 2016 ) study
suggests, owing to the conservative nature of body mass index (BMI) based estimates (Reilly, El-Ham-douchi, Diouf, Monyeki, & Somda, 2018 ). As a result of the established health risks of excess weight
(Ng et al., 2014 ) and substantial increases in prevalence (NCD Risk Factor Collaboration, 2016 ), over-
weight and obesity have become a major public health challenge (Dobbs et al., 2014 ); and rates of
overweight and obesity highlight that overweight is the new normal. The causes, prevention, and
management of overweight and obesity are complex (Swinburn et al., 2011 ); and include a myriad
of social, cultural and environmental factors, industry practices and public policies, personal attitudes
and behaviours, and human biology (McGlashan et al., 2018 ). Targeting high-risk groups with preven-
tion interventions forms a fundamental component of the comprehensive programme of actionrequired (WHO, 2011 ).
© 2019 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis GroupCONTACT Taylor Willmott t.willmott@gri ﬃth.edu.au
Supplemental data for this article can be accessed at https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1625280 .HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW
2019, VOL. 13, NO. 3, 295 –317
https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2019.1625280
Young adults are particularly vulnerable with the most rapid weight gain in the life-course
observed during the early twenties to mid-thirties (Flegal, Kruszon-Moran, Carroll, Fryar, & Ogden,
2016 ; Zheng et al., 2017 ). Population trends in adults indicate that obesity develops as a result of
gradual weight gain during early adulthood (McTigue, Garrett, & Popkin, 2002 ), with most obese indi-
viduals becoming so before the age of 35 (Sheehan, DuBrava, DeChello, & Fang, 2003 ). Moreover, inci-
dent obesity at a younger age carries an increased risk of chronic disease and mortality in later adult
life (Adams et al., 2014 ; de Mutsert, Sun, Willett, Hu, & van Dam, 2014 ; Zheng et al., 2017 ). Therefore,
interventions aimed at promoting e ﬀective weight management have the potential to prevent the
early onset of obesity and associated chronic disease in young adults (Spring et al., 2014 ).
The potential of electronic health to deliver prevention strategies
Despite the recognised importance of prevention measures (Dobbs et al., 2014 ), recruiting and enga-
ging young adults in weight management interventions has proven to be a particularly di ﬃcult task
(Partridge, Balestracci, et al., 2015 ). Given the current generation of young adults are among the
highest users of digital technologies such as social media, mobile phones, and wireless information
sharing platforms (Lenhart, Purcell, Smith, & Zickuhr, 2010 ), an electronic health (eHealth) based
approach o ﬀers considerable potential for engaging large numbers of young adults in weight man-
agement. Known as the ‘digital natives, ’Generation Y actively contributes, shares, searches for, and
consumes content online (Bolton et al., 2013 ). eHealth refers to the use of information communi-
cation technologies (ICTs) to deliver, or support the delivery of, health services (WHO, 2018 ).
eHealth interventions typically ascend from behaviour change interventions which have been oper-ationalised and transformed for delivery via an Internet-enabled device (Michie, Yardley, West,Patrick, & Greaves, 2017 ). The popularity, mobility, and capability of modern ICTs enables the delivery
of individually-tailored, context-speci ﬁc behaviour change interventions, with time-unlimited feed-
back, coaching, and support (Free et al., 2013 ; Vandelanotte et al., 2016 ). Although, it should be
noted that not all eHealth-based interventions are adaptive, with varying levels of technological
sophistication (Riley, Serrano, Nilsen, & Atienza, 2015 ).
Previous research
Previous reviews (Hebden, Chey, & Allman-Farinelli, 2012 ; Hutchesson, Hulst, & Collins, 2013 ; Laska,
Pelletier, Larson, & Story, 2012 ; Oosterveen, Tzelepis, Ashton, & Hutchesson, 2017 ; Partridge, Juan,
McGeechan, Bauman, & Allman-Farinelli, 2015 ; Poobalan, Aucott, Precious, Crombie, & Smith, 2010 )
of obesity lifestyle prevention interventions (in-person and technology-supported) targeting young
adults point to limited e ﬀectiveness. Limitations identi ﬁed within these reviews include: small
sample sizes (Hebden et al., 2012 ; Poobalan et al., 2010 ); diﬀerences in participant characteristics
(Hebden et al., 2012 ) including gender bias (Poobalan et al., 2010 ); varied intervention durations
(Hebden et al., 2012 ; Poobalan et al., 2010 ); risk of bias or low methodological quality (Hutchesson
et al., 2013 ; Partridge, Juan, et al., 2015 ); and large heterogeneity across intervention design and out-
comes (Hebden et al., 2012 ; Laska et al., 2012 ; Oosterveen et al., 2017 ; Poobalan et al., 2010 ). These
reviews focused primarily on pooling primary outcome results to obtain one overall estimate of e ﬀec-
tiveness. Currently, our knowledge of the extent that theory is reported and applied in eHealthweight management interventions targeting young adults is limited.
Review rationale and aim
To better understand how interventions are (or are not) achieving the desired outcomes it is necess-
ary to unpack the ‘black box ’(Tate et al., 2016 ). Theory is a critical aspect of being able to deconstruct
interventions and theory can identify the underlying mechanisms of action –that is, the mediators
and moderators of change (Davis, Campbell, Hildon, Hobbs, & Michie, 2015 ; Tate et al., 2016 ).296 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
Theory provides a framework within which to identify appropriate intervention targets (i.e., theoreti-
cal predictors of behaviour) and component behaviour change techniques (BCTs) (Hardeman et al.,2005 ; Michie & Abraham, 2004 ; Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ; Michie, Johnston, Francis, Hardeman, &
Eccles, 2008 ; Michie, Carey, et al., 2017 ); enables hypothesis testing and accumulation of evidence
(Michie et al., 2008 ; Rothman, 2004 ,2009 ); informs the re ﬁnement and/or tailoring of theory and com-
ponent BCTs to enhance intervention e ﬃciency (Michie & Abraham, 2004 ; Rothman, 2004 ,2009 ); and
facilitates the advancement of the cumulative knowledge base (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ).
Some researchers suggest that behaviour change interventions may be enhanced by applying
theory (Craig et al., 2008 ; Davis et al., 2015 ; Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ). Several reviews indicate that
using theory as a basis for developing interventions generates larger eﬀ ects than interventions
which do not use theory at all (Avery, Donovan, Horwood, & Lane, 2013 ; Bluethmann, Bartholomew,
Murphy, & Vernon, 2017 ; Protogerou & Johnson, 2014 ; Taylor, Conner, & Lawton, 2012 ; Webb, Joseph,
Yardley, & Michie, 2010 ). There are, however, other reviews that provide equivocal or inconsistent
support (Ayling, Brierley, Johnson, Heller, & Eiser, 2015 ; Bhattarai et al., 2013 ; Black, Mullan, &
Sharpe, 2016 ; Dalgetty, Miller, & Dombrowski, 2019 ; Diep, Chen, Davies, Baranowski, & Baranowski,
2014 ; Lara et al., 2014 ; McEwan et al., 2019 ; Prestwich et al., 2014 ); some even suggest theory-
based interventions are less e ﬀective than interventions that do not apply theory at all (Gardner,
Wardle, Poston, & Croker, 2011 ; Mehtälä, Sääkslahti, Inkinen, & Poskiparta, 2014 ; Portnoy, Ferrer,
Bergman, & Klein, 2014 ).
Scholars have provided several explanations for this mixed picture including: limited and/or poor
use of theory; inappropriate selection of theory and/or combining multiple theories with no concep-
tual justi ﬁcation; poor reporting of theory use; and confounds (Prestwich, Webb, & Conner, 2015 ).
Reviewers often deem an intervention as ‘theory-based ’if the authors simply mention a theory in
relation to the intervention, with little consideration given to exactly how theory has informed the
intervention (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ).
 Given very few authors explicitly explain how theory is
applied in su ﬃcient detail (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ; Painter, Borba, Hynes, Mays, & Glanz, 2008 ), dis-
cussions regarding the potential role of theory in enhancing intervention eﬀ ectiveness may be
premature.
eHealth interventions aim to change behaviours (e.g., sleep, eating, physical activity, alcohol
use and more) linked to an outcome (e.g., weight management) by using information (data)about a person and their environment to adapt and tailor the delivery of intervention content
to the changing needs of the individual and their environment (Hekler et al., 2016a ). Theories
are key to e ﬀectively organising this information (data) in a meaningful way that accounts for
what is known about the causal mechanisms and moderators of behaviour and behaviouralchange within the individual context (Hekler et al., 2016b ). eHealth interventions o ﬀer a basis
for the development of precise theories that take into account variations over time in individual
characteristics and contexts (Hekler et al., 2016a ). For example, just-in-time adaptive interventions
(JITAI) quickly collect and compute data on an individual’s current state, situational context,
and prior intervention experiences to deliver the most appropriate intervention at the most
optimal time (Intille, Kukla, Farzanfar, & Bakr, 2003 ; Riley et al., 2011 ). While further research is
needed to establish exactly how current behaviour and behavioural change theories can be
applied and used to evaluate such dynamic types of interventions (Riley et al., 2011 ), theoretical
underpinnings remain critical for understanding the complexity of real-world behaviour andbehavioural change (Hekler et al., 2016b ; Michie, Yardley, West, Patrick & Greaves, 2017 ).
This review evaluates the extent that theory use is reported in eHealth weight management inter-
ventions targeting young adults using a previously validated Theory Coding Scheme (TCS) (Michie &
Prestwich, 2010 ). The TCS is used to assess the reported use of theory in intervention design,
implementation, and evaluation (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ). The TCS was developed to inform evi-
dence syntheses and has been applied previously (Black et al., 2016 ; Garnett et al., 2018 ; Prestwich
et al., 2014 ; Webb et al., 2010 ). The four research questions underpinning the review were:HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 297
RQ1: Which theories are mentioned?
RQ2: How is theory applied in the design and implementation of the intervention?
RQ3: Is theory measured and tested in the evaluation of the intervention?
RQ4: Are intervention results used to further develop and/or reﬁ ne theory to better inform the design of future
interventions?
Methods
Studies used in this comprehensive assessment of reported theory use were identi ﬁed through a sys-
tematic search strategy and review that are reported in detail elsewhere (Willmott, Pang, Rundle-
Thiele, & Badejo, 2019 ). The aim of the previously published review was to locate and synthesise
the evidence on eHealth weight management interventions targeting young adults, with a particular
focus on eHealth intervention components and outcomes. The systematic search strategy and review
were conducted in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-
analyses (PRISMA) guidelines (Liberati et al., 2009 ) and the completed PRISMA checklist is available
as supplementary material (see Willmott et al., 2019 ). The present study assesses the extent of
reported theory use in eHealth weight management interventions targeting young adults using
the TCS (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ) and examines how theory may be applied to enhance weight-
related outcomes in interventions.
Information sources and search strategy
The systematic literature search was completed in September 2018 and executed across 14 electronicdatabases (reported in Willmott et al., 2019 ). The reference lists of all included papers and pertinent
systematic reviews (Hebden et al., 2012 ; Oosterveen et al., 2017 ; Partridge, Juan, et al., 2015 ) were
hand searched to identify additional studies for inclusion and Google Scholar was used to screenpapers citing included studies.
Study selection
All retrieved records were downloaded to EndNote Version X8, duplicates were removed, and theremaining studies were assessed for eligibility by two independent reviewers. The results were cate-
gorised by title and abstract into (i) papers appearing to meet study selection criteria; (ii) papers that
should be retrieved for further examination; and (iii) excluded papers (see Figure 1 ). In cases where
there were several publications from the same cohort, the study with the longest follow-up was
selected; if the follow-up was equivalent, the most recent study was selected. The full text of poten-
tially relevant papers was then obtained and assessed for eligibility by two independent reviewers. Atall stages, any discrepancies were discussed and resolved by consensus.
Eligibility and inclusion criteria
To be eligible for this review, studies had to be (i) published in the English language; (ii) peer-reviewed; (iii) report evaluations of eHealth weight management interventions targeting young
adults (aged 18– 35 years old), including randomised controlled trials (RCTs), controlled clinical
trials (CCTs), and cohort studies (pretest-posttest and post-test only); (iv) include participants who
were healthy and free of acute illness or chronic disease, and not pregnant; and (v) report a
measure of weight pre- and post-intervention.
In the present review, eHealth referred to behaviour change interventions which were operatio-
nalised and transformed for delivery via ICTs including computers, tablets, mobiles, smartphones,298 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
wearable and non-wearable tracking devices, and digital games. To be eligible, eHealth had to form
the primary means of intervention delivery in at least one treatment arm in the prevention-focused
study. The technology could be used as both a tool to enable a process, function or service, or as the
embodiment of eHealth itself (Oh, Rizo, Enkin, & Jadad, 2005 ). For the purposes of the present review,
weight management was de ﬁned as the prevention of weight gain via the maintenance of a healthy
body weight and/or the reversal of small gains in order to maintain a healthy body weight (Gill, King,& Webb, 2005 ). Studies which evaluated weight loss and/or weight loss maintenance interventions
among the obese (mean BMI > 30 kg/m
2) were excluded as weight gain prevention (i.e., manage-
ment) was the focus of this study and participants who have lost signi ﬁcant amounts of weight do
not represent the general young adult population (AIHW, 2017 ).
The published literature indicates that approaches to weight gain prevention di ﬀer from those
aiming to treat individuals who are already obese (Nguyen & Lau, 2012 ). The prevention of weight
gain relies on the behavioural modi ﬁcation of diet and activity patterns (WHO, 2011 ). The treatment
of obesity (via weight loss) after it has fully developed is much more complex. Although weight loss
can also be achieved through dietary restriction and/or increased physical activity, such conservative
approaches have demonstrated limited e ﬀectiveness among the obese (de Zwaan, 2012 ), with the
overwhelming majority of people regaining the weight lost over the long-term (Dombrowski,
Knittle, Avenell, Araujo-Soares, & Sniehotta, 2014 ; Fildes et al., 2015 ; Sumithran & Proietto, 2013 ).
The physiological adaptions experienced during weight loss are thought to be responsible forFigure 1. PRISMA ﬂowchart of review process.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 299
weight regain (Sumithran & Proietto, 2013 ). As a result, conservative approaches promoting healthy
eating and regular physical activity are unlikely to impact the weight status of overweight and obese
individuals in the long term (Proietto, 2011 ). Therefore, adjunctive measures are sought such as phar-
macotherapy and bariatric surgery (Nguyen & Lau, 2012 ). Currently, there are no non-surgical treat-
ments available with demonstrated long-term safety and eﬃ cacy to circumvent physiological
changes and assist weight-reduced people with obesity who are unable to maintain weight loss
(Sumithran & Proietto, 2013 ). Obesity is associated with signi ﬁcantly increased morbidity and mor-
tality risk, which rises with increasing BMI, and further complicates treatment. A BMI > 35 kg/m2
with obesity-associated co-morbidities is a traditional indication for bariatric surgery (the mosteﬀective method for weight loss), particularly when attempts at conservative treatment have
failed (de Zwaan, 2012 ). Conservative approaches are rarely successful among the obese and surgical
weight loss options are currently the only weight loss methods with medium- and long-term success(de Zwaan, 2012 ). The extremely high somatic and mental comorbidity, and the signi ﬁcantly
increased mortality in the morbidly obese, necessitate eﬀ ective methods to reduce weight and
rule out conservative approaches (de Zwaan, 2012 ). Given secondary prevention is extremely
diﬃcult to achieve, a primary prevention focus among children and young adults is required
(Proietto, 2011 ; Spring et al., 2014 ; Zheng et al., 2017 ).
In the present review, the age range of 18– 35 years was selected based on the protocol included in
the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute ’sEarly Adult Reduction of Weight through Lifestyle
(EARLY) intervention trials (Loria, Arteaga, Belle, Signore, & Riley, 2011 ). Weight gain is most rapid
during these years (Flegal et al., 2016 ; Zheng et al., 2017 ) and increasing BMI in young adulthood
increases the risk of developing metabolic syndrome over the subsequent 15 years almost 20-fold
(Lloyd-Jones et al., 2007 ).
Studies were excluded on the basis of the following criteria: (i) not peer-reviewed; (ii) not pub-
lished in the English language; (iii) not related to eHealth andweight management; (iv) not an inter-
vention evaluation; (v) inclusion of participants who had a mean BMI > 30 kg/m
2, a chronic or acute
illness, self-disclosed mental illness, or were pregnant; (vi) did not report a measure of weight pre and
postintervention; or (vii) did not speci ﬁcally target young adults (aged 18 –35 years). Studies that did
not report an age range, the mean age of the sample, or the percentage of the sample who were
within a given age range, were also excluded (see Figure 1 ).
Data collection process
A PRISMA-informed data extraction spreadsheet was developed for abstracting study characteristicsin Excel. Data included: study details (author, year of publication, and country); study design; theoryuse; participants (sample size, characteristics, setting, retention, and blinding); intervention and com-
parator details; duration; data collection methods, measures, and outcomes; and conclusions.
Summary tables were thoroughly and independently reviewed by all authors for accuracy andrelevance.
Extent of theory use
Extent of theory use was assessed using the 19-item TCS (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ). The scheme
assesses: (i) mentioning/referencing of theory; (ii) application of theory; (iii) measurement andtesting of theory; and (iv) building and re ﬁning theory. For the purposes of the present review,
Items 14 and 16 of the TCS were not assessed. Item 14 relates to randomisation and is not directlyrelevant to theory use; and Item 16 was considered super ﬂuous to Item 15. The remaining 17
items were coded and used in the analysis reported in this review (see Supporting Information
Table S1 for TCS item descriptions).
The TCS is a comprehensive tool that can be applied by researchers to identify the extent
that theory is reported in behaviour cha nge interventions (Michie & Prestwich, 2010). The TCS300 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
was the chosen method of theory assess m e n tf o rt h i sr e v i e wa si tp r o v i d e sa ‘detailed, objective,
and reliable method ’for assessing the extent to which behavioural interventions are reporting
theory use in behavioural intervention desi gn, implementation, and evaluation (Michie &
Prestwich, 2010 , p. 2). To permit objective assessment, the TCS provides a clear description
for each item. Speci ﬁcally, each item requires a ‘yes, ’‘no,’or‘don ’tk n o w ’response and support-
ing evidence (e.g., page number). Moreover, a glossary of terms (e.g., theory, theory-relevant
constructs, predictor, and intervention techniq ue) is provided to guide assessments of reported
theory use. In the present review, two independent researchers assessed theory use in
included studies to ensure reliability of co ding, with a high-level of agreement (95%)
reached. For any discrepancies, a third independ ent researcher acting as an arbitrator was con-
sulted. Where applicable, devel opment, feasibility, and/or pro tocol papers referenced in the
included studies were also assessed to ensure t he most comprehensive assessment of theory
use was obtained.
Consistent with previous reviews (Garnett et al., 2018 ), an overall use of theory score was calcu-
lated as a sum of the total, with a maximum possible score of 23 (17 primary items plus six sub-
items). To ensure the representativeness of the composite scores, any item coded as present for
detailing ‘all’(Items 7, 10, 13a and 13c) was also coded as present for the equivalent item detailing
‘at least one ’(Items 8, 11, 13b and 3d). Lastly, each study was categorised as having weak, moderate,
or strong levels of theory use based on total TCS scores (weak = 0 –7; moderate = 8 –15; and strong =
16–23).
Data synthesis
A narrative approach to data analysis was employed in this review. Narrative systematic
reviews are useful for exploring the developme nt of particular ideas (e.g., theoretical appli-
cation) and for advancing our knowledge of a particular intervention, problem, or ﬁeld of
research (Gurevitch, Koricheva, Nakagawa, & Stewart, 2018). In order for systematic reviews
to incorporate quantitative meta-analyses to assess the magnitude of outcome(s) across rel-
evant primary studies, and to analyse the s ources of variation among study outcomes,
suﬃcient and appropriate quantitative data is needed from the studies that are being summar-
ised (Gurevitch et al., 2018). Meta-regression requires a su ﬃcient level of power to reliably
detect e ﬀect size. Speci ﬁcally, research indicates that more than 200 studies are required for
80% power to detect modest associations in meta-regressions (Hempel et al., 2013). With
only 24 eligible studies retrieved from our systematic search, any meta-regressions would
have insu ﬃcient power to reliably detect modest associ ations. Furthermore, considerable het-
erogeneity (clinical and methodological) a cross study designs, behaviours, and outcomes
measured was evident. For example, the behavi oural focus of the 24 included studies varied
across nine di ﬀerent combinations: three focused on self-weighing ,o n ef o c u s e do n diet only ,
three focused on PA only, 10 focused on diet and PA ,t w of o c u s e do ndiet, PA, responsible drink-
ing, and not smoking, one focused on diet, PA, and stress ,t w of o c u s e do n diet, PA, and self-
weighing ,o n ef o c u s e do n diet, PA, sleep and stress, and one focused on stress, nutrition,
alcohol, and physical activity . In such cases, it is considered more appropriate to undertake a
narrative systematic review as opposed to a meta-analysis (Liberati et al., 2009). Moreover, a
large proportion of studies in this review did not rigorously apply theory. Speci ﬁcally, 17
studies reported weak levels of theory use, ﬁvemoderate ,a n dt w o strong .C o n s e q u e n t l y ,a n y
meta-analytic comparisons betw een theory use and intervention e ﬀectiveness are premature.
As such, this review focuses on describing the extent of reported theory use in includedstudies. This study aims to illuminate the need to increase levels of theory reporting and/or
application to ensure the scienti ﬁc research community can progress current knowledge of
how best to apply theory to enhance intervention outcomes by systematically identifyingwhich theories work, for whom, how, why, and when.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 301
Results
Overall, 3280 records were retrieved from the initial search and following the removal of duplicates,
1301 records were assessed for eligibility via title and abstract. Following the application of exclusion
criteria, 1237 records were excluded. Eleven additional records were identi ﬁed from other sources,
resulting in a total of 75 full-text articles retained and assessed for eligibility. Of these, twenty-four
studies met the criteria for inclusion (refer to Figure 1 ).
Study characteristics
Table 1 provides a summary of individual study characteristics for the 24 included studies. Further
detail on intervention (eHealth) components and outcomes is reported elsewhere (Willmott et al.,
2019 ). The exclusive focus of this paper is on describing the extent of reported theory use in included
studies. In terms of behavioural focus, 10 studies focused on both healthy eating and physical activity,
seven focused on multiple behaviours (e.g., healthy eating, physical activity, stress management,
sleep, etc.), three focused on self-weighing, three focused on physical activity only, and onefocused on healthy eating only (refer to Table 1 ). Overall, 12 out of the 24 studies did not report
any signi ﬁcant weight-related changes compared with control groups, 8 reported positive weight-
related outcomes (e.g., prevention of weight gain and/or reversal of small gains), and four reportedmixed e ﬀects (see Table 1 ).
Extent of theory use
Out of the 24 included studies in this review, the mean total use of theory score was 6/23 (SD 5; Min.
= 0, Max. = 17); 17 studies were classi ﬁed as having weak application of theory, ﬁve as moderate, and
two as strong. Total use of theory scores suggests studies are not rigorously applying theory to inter-
vention design, implementation, and evaluation, and/or are failing to explicitly report theory use in
suﬃcient detail. The following section describes the results of the comprehensive theory use assess-
ment in terms of (i) mentioning of theory; (ii) application of theory; (iii) testing of theory; and lastly (iv)
building and re ﬁning of theory. Table 2 provides a high-level summary of the TCS results.
Mention of theory (Items 1– 2)
Most studies (N = 18) mentioned a theory or model (Item 1, Table 2 ), however, only nine studies (Item
2,Table 2 ) referred to the referenced theory as a predictor of behaviour and presented evidence of
the relationship between the theoretical constructs in the theoretical model cited and the behaviour
of interest (see Table 3 ). Of the studies referencing a theory (or theories), Social Cognitive Theory (SCT)
was most mentioned (N = 10), followed by the Transtheoretical Model (TTM) (N = 6), the Theory of
Planned Behaviour/Reasoned Action (TRA/TPB) (N = 2), and Self-Determination Theory (SDT) (N = 2).
References were also made to Self-aﬃrmation Theory ,Model of Action Phases ,Stealth Model ,Rational
Model ,Control Theory , the Health Belief Model ,Social Learning Theory ,Social Network Theory (SNT) , and
Ecological Theory .Table 3 provides a summary of the theories mentioned, along with the location and
evidence provided for the nine studies referring to (or explaining) the chosen theory as a predictor of
the target behaviour(s) (Item 2, Table 2 ).
Application of theory (Items 3– 11)
Of those studies mentioning a theory, 50% (N = 9) were reportedly based on a single theory (Item 3,Table 2 ) such as SCT or SDT, while the other 50% (N = 9) were reportedly based on a combination of
predictors from multiple theories. For example, the CHOICES conceptual model was informed by eco-
logical theories of health behaviour, SCT, and SNT. No study reported using theory/predictors to
select recipients for the intervention (Item 4, Table 2 ). That is, no study screened/selected participants
based on achieving a particular score/level on a theory-relevant construct/predictor (Michie &302 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
Table 1. Summary of individual study characteristics.
Author/year Country Study type Sample Retention Outcome Behavioural focuseHealth component
(s) DurationOutcome
eﬀectEPHPP
ratingTCS
rating
Levitsky, Garay, Nausbaum, Neighbors,
and DellaValle ( 2006 )USA CCT N = 32 81% Weight
managementSelf-weighing Email 12 wks. + Weak Weak
Levitsky et al. ( 2006 ) USA CCT N = 41 78% Weight
managementSelf-weighing Email 12 wks. + Weak Weak
Gow, Trace, and Mazzeo ( 2010 ) USA RCT N = 159 69%aWeight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website
Email6 wks. +/- Weak Weak
Wadsworth and Hallam ( 2010 ) USA CCT N = 91 78% Weight
managementPA eLearning website
Email6 wks. NIL Weak Strong
Dennis, Potter, Estabrooks, and Davy
(2012 )USA CCT N = 45 87% Weight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website 14 wks. +/- Weak Moderate
Greene et al. ( 2012 ) USA CCT N = 1689 67% Weight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website 10 wks. NIL Weak Weak
LaChausse ( 2012 ) USA CCT N = 320 98% Weight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website 12 wks. NIL Weak Weak
Harvey-Berino, Pope, Gold, Leonard,
and Belliveau ( 2012 )USA Cohort
studyN = 336 98% Weight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website
Online synchronous
chat12 wks. + Weak Weak
Kattelmann et al. ( 2014 ) USA CCT N = 1639 59% Weight
managementDiet, PA & stress eLearning website
Email10 wks. NIL Weak Moderate
Muñoz et al. ( 2014 ) USA RCT N = 201 57% Weight
managementPA Wearable tracking
device
Text messages16 wks. NIL Weak Weak
Hebden et al. ( 2014 ) AUS RCT N = 51 90% Weight
managementDiet & PA Text messages
Emails
Smartphone
application
Internet forum12 wks. NIL Moderate Weak
Epton et al. ( 2014 ) UK RCT N = 1445 63% Weight
managementDiet, PA, responsible
drinking & not
smokingeLearning website
Smartphone
application12 mo. NIL Weak Moderate
Bertz, Pacanowski, and Levitsky (2015 ) USA CCT N = 167 78% Weight
managementSelf-weighing Email
Wi-Fi scale12 mo. + Weak Weak
Cameron et al. ( 2015 ) UK RCT N = 2621 42% Weight
managementDiet, PA, responsible
drinking & notsmokingeLearning website 6 mo. NIL Weak Moderate
Nikolaou, Hankey, and Lean ( 2015 ) USA RCT N = 20975 83% Weight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website
Electronic forums/
mail19 wks. + Weak Weak
(Continued )HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 303
Table 1. Continued.
Author/year Country Study type Sample Retention Outcome Behavioural focuseHealth component
(s) DurationOutcome
eﬀectEPHPP
ratingTCS
rating
Allman-Farinelli et al. ( 2016 ) AUS CCT N = 250 81% Weight
managementDiet & PA Telephone
counselling
Text messages
EmailWebsite
Smartphone
applications12 wks. + Moderate Weak
Schweitzer, Ross, Klein, Lei, and Mackey
(2016 )USA CCT N = 148 72% Weight
managementDiet & PA eLearning website
Email24 wks. NIL Weak Weak
Wing et al. ( 2016 ) USA CCT N = 599 87% Weight
managementDiet, PA & self-
weighingWebsite
Email24 mo. + Moderate Moderate
Kerr et al. ( 2016 ) AUS RCT N = 247 89% Weight
managementDiet Text messages 6 mo. +/- Weak Weak
West et al. ( 2016 ) USA CCT N = 58 97% Weight
managementDiet, PA & self-
weighingeNewsletterSNSWi-Fi scaleWearable tracking
device9 wks. NIL Weak Weak
Lytle et al. ( 2017 ) USA CCT N = 441 83% Weight
managementDiet, PA, sleep &
stresseLearning websiteSNS24 mo. +/- Weak Weak
Ashton et al. ( 2017 ) AUS RCT N = 50 94% Weight
managementStress, nutrition,
alcohol & PAWebsite
Wearable tracking
device
Application
SNS3 mo. + Moderate Weak
Chung, Skinner, Hasty, and Perrin ( 2017 ) USA Cohort
bN = 12 N/G Weight
managementDiet & PA Wearable tracking
device
ApplicationSNS2 mo. NIL Weak Weak
Simons et al. ( 2018 ) Belgium RCT N = 130 92% Weight
managementPA Smartphone
application
Wearable tracking
device9 wks. NIL Moderate Strong
Weight related outcomes: + = positive e ﬀect; - = negative e ﬀect; +/- = mixed e ﬀect; NIL = no e ﬀect.
aAnalyses of follow-up data were not conducted owing to high attrition (89%).
bSingle arm intervention –owing to the small sample size, tests of di ﬀerence between the groups were not examined.
Cut oﬀ s for TCS ratings –weak = 0– 7; moderate = 8– 15; and strong = 16 –23.
Note: further detail on intervention components, outcomes, and methodological quality assessments (EPHPP QA Tool) is reported elsewhere (Willmott et al., 2019 ).
Abbreviations: CCT (controlled clinical trial); E ﬀective Public Health Practice Project (EPHPP); PA (physical activity), RCT (randomised controlled trial); SMS (short message service); SNS (Socia l Network
Sites); TCS (Theory Coding Scheme).304 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
Table 2. Theory coding results.
TCS item no.a
Study 1 2 3 4 56789 1 0 1 1 1 2 a 1 2 b 1 3 a 1 3 b 1 3 c 1 3 d 1 3 e 1 3 f 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 Score
Levitsky et al. ( 2006 ) ⨯ ––– –––––– – – – – – – – – – – – – – 0
Levitsky et al. ( 2006 ) ⨯ ––– –––––– – – – – – – – – – – – – – 0
Gow et al. ( 2010 ) ✓ ⨯✓ ⨯ ⨯⨯⨯⨯⨯⨯ ⨯ ⨯ ⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 2
Wadsworth and Hallam ( 2010 )✓✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓✓⨯ ✓✓ ✓ ⨯ ✓✓ – ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ⨯ 16
Dennis et al. ( 2012) ✓ ⨯✓ ⨯✓ ⨯✓ + ⨯✓ +✓✓ ⨯ ✓ ⨯ ✓✓✓ ⨯⨯ ⨯ ⨯ 13
Greene et al. ( 2012 ) ✓ ⨯⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 5
LaChausse ( 2012 ) ⨯ ––– –––––– – – – – – – – – – – – – – 0
Harvey-Berino et al. ( 2012 ) ✓ ⨯✓ ⨯✓✓⨯ ✓✓⨯⨯⨯ ⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 6
Kattelmann et al. ( 2014 ) ✓ ⨯✓ ⨯✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ ✓✓ ✓ ⨯⨯⨯⨯ ✓✓ ✓ ✓ ⨯⨯ 12
Muñoz et al. ( 2014 ) ⨯ ––– –––––– – – – – – – – – – – – – – 0
Hebden et al. ( 2014 ) ✓✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓ ⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 6
Epton et al. ( 2014 ) ✓✓⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓ ⨯⨯ ✓✓ ✓ ⨯⨯⨯⨯ ✓✓ ✓b✓ ⨯⨯ 11
Bertz et al. ( 2015 ) ⨯ ––– –––––– – – – – – – – – – – – – – 0
Cameron et al. ( 2015 ) ✓✓⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓ ⨯⨯ ✓✓ ✓ ⨯⨯⨯⨯ ✓✓ ✓b✓ ⨯⨯ 11
Nikolaou et al. ( 2015 ) ✓ ⨯⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯⨯⨯⨯ ⨯ ⨯ ⨯ –––––– – ✓ –– 3
Allman-Farinelli et al. ( 2016 )✓✓⨯⨯ ✓✓⨯ ✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 7
Schweitzer et al. ( 2016 ) ✓ ⨯⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 5
Wing et al. ( 2016 ) ✓✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯✓ + ⨯✓ + ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 8
Kerr et al. ( 2016 ) ✓ ⨯✓ ⨯✓ ⨯⨯✓ ⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 5
West et al. ( 2016 ) ✓✓⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓✓⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 6
Lytle et al. ( 2017 ) ✓✓⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯⨯✓✓ ⨯✓ ⨯⨯ –– –––– – ⨯ –– 6
Ashton et al. ( 2017 ) ✓ ⨯⨯⨯ ✓ ⨯✓ +✓✓ + ⨯⨯ –––––– – ⨯ –– 7
Chung et al. ( 2017 ) ⨯ ––– –––––– – – – – – – – – – – – – – 0
Simons et al. ( 2018 ) ✓✓⨯⨯ ✓✓✓+ ✓✓ +✓✓✓+ ✓ + ✓✓ ⨯⨯ ⨯ ⨯ 17
✓= Yes; ⨯= No; –= unable/inappropriate to score; + = scored ALL for previous item.
aRefer to Supporting Information 1 for TCS item descriptions.
bIntervention had a mixed e ﬀect on social cognitive (TPB) variables.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 305
Table 3. Theories mentioned.
Study Theory/model mentioned Location and evidence
Levitsky et al.
(2006 )N/G –
Levitsky et al.
(2006 )N/G –
Gow et al. ( 2010 ) Social Cognitive Theory N/G
Wadsworth and
Hallam ( 2010 )Social Cognitive Theory p. 61 ‘[SCT] provides a comprehensive theoretical
framework for understanding exercise behaviour as it
relates to these determinants and can be adapted to a
website delivery. ’
Dennis et al.
(2012 )Social Cognitive Theory N/G
Greene et al.
(2012 )Social Cognitive Theory; Transtheoretical Model N/G
LaChausse ( 2012 ) N/G –
Harvey-Berino
et al. ( 2012 )Social Cognitive Theory N/G
Kattelmann et al.
(2014 )Transtheoretical Model N/G
Muñoz et al.
(2014 )N/G –
Hebden et al.
(2014 )Transtheoretical Model p. 324 ‘Text messages were tailored to the processes of
change identi ﬁed in the Transtheoretical Model, and
moved from addressing cognitive to behavioural
processes to facilitate movement through stages of
change. ’
Epton et al. ( 2014 ) Self-A ﬃrmation Theory; Theory of Planned
Behaviour; Model of Action Phasesp. 2 ‘…included three theory-based techniques to
promote health behaviour change …self-aﬃrmation
manipulation was included to reduce defensiveprocessing of health messages …theory-based (TPB)
messages were designed to increase motivation toadopt healthy behaviours …and participants were
prompted to form implementation intentions to helpthem to translate their intentions to change intobehaviour. ’
Bertz et al. ( 2015 ) N/G –
Cameron
et al.
(2015 )Self-aﬃrmation Theory; Theory of Planned
Behaviour; Model of Action Phasesp. 2 ‘…used three theory-based techniques to target
the four health behaviours …a self-a ﬃrmation
manipulation was used to reduce defensive processingof health messages …theory-based (TPB) messages
were developed to target the key beliefs underlying thefour health behaviours …implementation intention
tasks were included to help translate good intentionsinto healthy behaviour. ’
Nikolaou et al.
(2015 )Stealth Model; Rational Model N/G
Allman-Farinelli
et al. ( 2016 )Control Theory; Transtheoretical Model [Methods] ‘Goal setting and review were included in the
coaching and modelled on Control Theory with their
intake (input function) compared with recommended
(comparator) …’ AND ‘For each of the 4 key
behaviours addressed, a staging algorithm based onthe Transtheoretical Model was completed as part of
the baseline survey by all participants [20,25] …
Messages were strati ﬁed by sex and whether the
participant was in pre-contemplation, contemplation,
preparation, action, or maintenance stages for each of
the 4 behaviours. ’
Schweitzer et al.
(2016 )Health Belief Model; Theory of Reasoned Action;
Social Cognitive Theory; Social Learning Theory;
Transtheoretical Model
aN/G
Wing et al. ( 2016 ) Control Theorybp. 756 ‘Both interventions were based on a self-
regulation model shown previously to be e ﬀective in
preventing weight regain [15]; both emphasisedfrequent self-weighing and changes in eating and
activity to prevent weight gain. ’
(Continued )306 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
Prestwich, 2010 ). Seventeen studies used theoretical predictors to select/develop intervention tech-
niques (Item 5, Table 2 ). Four studies reported using theory/predictors to tailor intervention tech-
niques to recipients; that is, the intervention di ﬀered for di ﬀerent sub-groups that varied on a
psychological construct or predictor at baseline (Item 6, Table 2 ). For example, in the TXT2BFiT inter-
vention (Allman-Farinelli et al., 2016 ) survey data collected from participants at baseline were used to
create a staging algorithm based on the TTM to generate a personalised set of text messages tailored
to whether the participant was in the pre-contemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, or
maintenance stage of change. More cognitive messages were sent if a participant was in the earlystages of change (pre-contemplation, contemplation, and preparation stages) and more behavioural
messages were sent if the participant was in the later stages of change (action or maintenance
stages).
In terms of linking intervention techniques with theoretical constructs, only four studies explicitly
linked all intervention techniques to at least one theory-relevant construct/predictor (Item 7, Table 2 );
with a further 12 (Item 8, Table 2 ) explicitly linking at least one, but not all, of the intervention tech-
niques to at least one theory-relevant construct/predictor. Conversely, nine studies (Item 9, Table 2 )
linked a group or cluster of techniques to a group or cluster of constructs/predictors. Only four studiesexplicitly linked all theory-relevant constructs/predictors to at least one intervention technique (Item10,Table 2 ), with a further 11 (Item 11, Table 2 ) explicitly linking at least one, but not all, theory-rel-
evant constructs/predictors to at least one intervention technique. For example, many interventionsthat were based on SCT focused their intervention techniques on developing self-regulation beha-viours (via self-monitoring and goal setting) but neglected other key concepts such as observational
learning (i.e., social in ﬂuences or reinforcements), outcome expectations (i.e., anticipated conse-
quences of performing a behaviour), and self-e ﬃcacy (i.e., individual perceptions of con ﬁdence to
successfully perform a behaviour). Therefore, these studies only partially utilised the full predictive(or explanatory) power of the stated theoretical model.Table 3. Continued.
Study Theory/model mentioned Location and evidence
Kerr et al. ( 2016 ) Self-Determination Theory N/G
West et al. ( 2016 ) Social Cognitive Theory
Lytle et al. ( 2017 ) Ecological Theory; Social Cognitive Theory; Social
Network Theorycp. 70 ‘The CHOICES conceptual model is informed by
ecological theories of health behaviour, Social
Cognitive Theory, and Social Network Theory. Themodel posits that weight-related factors are mostproximately in ﬂuenced by mutable behaviours
including energy intake, energy expenditure, and otherhealth-related behaviours. These behaviours occurwithin the context of individual factors, the homeenvironment, and the social environment. ’
Ashton et al.
(2017 )Social Cognitive Theory/Self-Determination Theory N/G
Chung et al.
(2017 )N/G –
Simons et al.
(2018 )Attitude –Social In ﬂuence –Self-Eﬃcacy Model; Self-
Determination Theory[Feasibility Paper –Methods] ‘The content of the app
was developed to incorporate an autonomy-supportive communication style, based on the Self-Determination Theory. Self-Determination Theory
suggests that the content of goals (ie, intrinsic vs
extrinsic) and the way goal contents arecommunicated (ie, autonomy-supportive vscontrolling) explain variance in people ’s motivation
and performance. ’
N/G = none given.
aBased on a previous intervention (ALIVE) which was grounded in the several theories listed.
bAuthors reportedly adopt Carver and Scheier ’s(1982 ) Control Theory approach.
cBased on several theories and formative research the authors created their own conceptual framework.HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 307
Testing of theory (Items 12– 14)
Out of those studies reportedly based on a theory, only six studies measured theory-relevant con-
structs pre and postintervention (Items 12a and 12b, Table 2 ), and only three (Items 13a –13d)
reported the reliability and/or validity of the psychometric scales used to measure theory-relevantconstructs/predictors. In contrast, measures of behaviour generally had some evidence of theirreliability and/or had been previously validated in the studies reporting pre and postintervention
measurement of theory-relevant constructs (Items 13e and 13f, Table 2 ). Among the six studies
measuring theory-relevant constructs pre and postintervention, four reported that the intervention
led to a signi ﬁcant change in at least one theory-relevant predictor (construct) in favour of the inter-
vention (Item 14, Table 2 ). For example, Wadsworth and Hallam ’s(2010 ) intervention focused on six
self-regulation skills (self-monitoring, goal setting, social support, reinforcements, time management,and relapse) and reported a successful increase ( P= .002) in participant ’s self-regulation skills
postintervention.
Building and re ﬁning of theory (Items 15– 17)
Out of those studies reporting a theory (or a combination of theories), ﬁve discussed study ﬁndings in
relation to the theory mentioned (Item 15, Table 2 ), and one provided appropriate support for the
theory (Item 16, Table 2 ). That is, theory-relevant constructs were reported to signi ﬁcantly mediate
the relationship between the intervention and observed behavioural change. Namely, Wadsworthand Hallam ( 2010 ) reported a signi ﬁcant meditation between self-regulation and frequency of self-
reported moderate physical activity postintervention. Conversely, an appropriate refutation of the
theory would be based on obtaining null eﬀ ects (i.e., changing behaviour without changing
theory-relevant constructs). No study reported using intervention results to build and/or reﬁ ne the
theory upon which the intervention was based, or formulate suggestions for future reﬁ nement
(Item 17, Table 2 ).
Post-hoc tests
Following TCS coding, the authors ran a series of non-parametric post-hoc tests to examine any poten-tial associations between theory use and weight-related outcomes in included interventions. Pearson
chi-square and Fisher ’s exact tests were performed in SPSS v25 with two binary variables: TCS item
(present = yes/no) and outcome (e ﬀect = yes/no). Pearson chi-square tests are used to compare the
distribution of a categorical variable in a sample or a group with the distribution of another to establishwhether the categorically coded variables are statistically independent or associated with each other(Gravetter & Wallnau, 2016 ; Kim, 2017 ). While the chi-square test relies on an approximation, Fisher ’s
exact test is an exact test and is therefore considered to be a more appropriate measure of indepen-
dency when working with small samples (e.g., more than 20% of cells have expected frequencies <5) (Kim, 2017 ). Crammer ’s V was used to gauge the strength of the signi ﬁcant associations identi ﬁed
(Gravetter & Wallnau, 2016 ).
Statistically signi ﬁcant ( p< .05) associations were identi ﬁed between TCS Items 11, 12a and 12b,
and the binary outcome variable. Note: Items 14– 23 did not have su ﬃcient numbers (cell counts) to
run chi-square tests. The association between Item 11, ‘at least one, but not all, of the theory-relevant
constructs/predictors are explicitly linked to at least one intervention technique, ’and the binary
outcome was signi ﬁcant; with a large e ﬀect size ( χ
2[1, N = 24], 5.657, p= .043, ϕc.561). Interestingly,
the association between Item 8, ‘at least one, but not all, of the intervention techniques are explicitly
linked to at least one theory-relevant construct/predictor, ’and the binary outcome was not signi ﬁ-
cant ( χ2[1, N = 24], 3.536, p= 0.137, ϕc.443). The association between Item 12a, ‘at least one construct
of theory (or predictor) mentioned in relation to the intervention is measured postintervention, ’and
the binary outcome was signiﬁ cant; with a large e ﬀect size ( χ2[1, N = 24], 5.727, p= .038, ϕc.564).
Similarly, the association between Item 12b, ‘at least one construct of theory (or predictor) mentioned308 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
in relation to the intervention is measured pre and postintervention, ’and the binary outcome was
signiﬁ cant; with a large e ﬀect size ( χ2[1, N = 24], 5.727, p= .038, ϕc.564). All other associations
were not signi ﬁcant ( p> 0.05). The results of these tests must be treated with caution given
overall levels of theory use were weak.
Discussion
The application of theory is advocated by many scholars within the behavioural and social sciences as
an integral step in the design, implementation, and evaluation of behaviour change interventions
(Craig et al., 2008 ; Davis et al., 2015 ; Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ; Prestwich et al., 2015 ), including technol-
ogy-supported (i.e., eHealth) interventions (Webb et al., 2010 ). Findings from this review reveal that
while the majority of eHealth weight management interventions targeting young adults (aged 18 –35
years) mention theory (or a combination of theories), very few provide evidence to support the
relationship between theoretical constructs and the target behaviour (e.g., stress, diet, PA,smoking, alcohol use), or desired outcome (weight management). Furthermore, many studies do
not explicitly link theory to behaviour (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ) and/or outcomes. In the absence
of causal links, we cannot determine which constructs elicit (or not) the desired change in the
focal behaviour(s) (Hardeman et al., 2005 ) and/or other desired outcomes.
A theory should be selected to inform intervention design because it is suited to the particular
characteristics of the target behaviour, context, and population, not because it is the most commonlyused or most ‘popular’ theory within the published literature (Davis et al., 2015 ). Moreover, changing
behaviour requires a speci ﬁc and concrete deﬁ nition of the target behaviour (Michie & Johnston,
2004 )andtheﬁnal desired outcome. In the present review, only nine out of the 24 studies mentioned
a targeted theoretical construct(s) as a predictor of behaviour. One explanation for this may be that
little consideration was given to explicitly de ﬁning the target behaviour(s) pre intervention, or
another may be that the intervention was actually targeting multiple behaviours (i.e., a complex inter-
vention) and ‘speci ﬁc and concrete ’deﬁnitions for each individual behaviour were subsequently
overlooked. Indeed, 17 out of the 24 studies included in the review targeted multiple behaviours(e.g., diet, PA, sleep, stress, smoking, alcohol, etc.).
Selected theories (SCT, SDT, and TRA/TPB) were dominant in the review, which is consistent with
other review ﬁndings (Davis et al., 2015 ; Luca & Suggs, 2013 ; Painter et al., 2008 ; Truong, 2014 ).
Although these theories have been empirically proven to explain or predict a range of behaviours,there is a risk that with such popularity researchers may ‘habituate to the perspective a ﬀorded by
the theory in the way that one can forget that one is wearing glasses ’(Rothman, 2009 , p. 150S).
For example, many of these theories centre research attention on the individual determinants of(behaviour) change, thereby failing to account for the wider behavioural inﬂ uences originating
from outside the individual such as the social and physical environments (Brennan, Previte, & Fry,2016 ; Davis et al., 2015 ; Glanz & Bishop, 2010 ). An over reliance on dominant theories without
direct empirical tests or questioning of underlying assumptions (Noar & Zimmerman, 2005 ), limits
progress in the ﬁeld (Rothman, 2004 ; Weinstein & Rothman, 2005 ).
Review ﬁndings
 also highlight the lack of rigorous application of theory to intervention design,
implementation, and evaluation. In cases where an intervention was reportedly based on an explicit
theory (e.g., SCT or SDT), the theoretical model was generally used sub-optimally; with many studies
not explicitly linking all theoretical constructs with BCTs and vice versa. For instance, only one theor-etical construct (e.g., self-regulation) in the model was targeted by an appropriate BCT (e.g., self-moni-
toring or goal setting). Theory should provide a means for selecting appropriate BCTs and ensuring
these techniques are linked to the relevant theoretical constructs known to inﬂ uence the behaviour
of interest (Michie et al., 2008 ). Understanding the links between BCTs and relevant mechanisms of
action (i.e., theoretical constructs representing the processes through which they a ﬀect behaviour)
helps inform the systematic development of behaviour change interventions (Michie, Carey, et al.,2017 ). The authors of the HEYMAN intervention (Ashton, Morgan, Hutchesson, Rollo, & Collins, 2017 )HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 309
provide a good example of how theoretical constructs can be linked with the BCTs employed in the
intervention, and importantly, how this process can be explicitly reported within an evaluation paper(e.g., via a supplementary table).
Theory was not used to select recipients for the interventions included this review. According to
the TCS framework intervention designers should survey a sample of the target population based ona set of key psychological constructs (e.g., motivation, outcome expectations, self-e ﬃcacy and/or self-
regulation) prior to delivery and then use the pre-determined scores based on the selected psycho-logical construct(s) measured to select participants whom are most likely to bene ﬁt from the inter-
vention (e.g., participants with low levels of motivation or self-e ﬃcacy). Only three studies
reported using theory to tailor the intervention to di ﬀerent subgroups that varied on the theoretical
construct of interest measured at baseline. Tailoring has been shown to enhance the eﬀ ectiveness of
behaviour change interventions, including eHealth interventions (Lustria, Cortese, Noar, & Glueckauf,
2009 ; Noar & Zimmerman, 2005 ); and theory provides a guiding framework that may be applied to
the tailoring process (Noar & Zimmerman, 2005 ). Using theory to inform the re ﬁnement and/or tailor-
ing of an intervention can guide decisions on how to prioritise resources, and in so doing, ensuresthey are e ﬃciently distributed (Rothman, 2009 ).
This review highlights a distinct lack of studies testing theory, with a limited number of studies
measuring theoretical constructs pre and postintervention. Without appropriate theory testing,researchers are unable to isolate the underlying mechanisms of action, and in turn, identify which
components of the intervention are driving observed outcomes (Michie & Abraham, 2004 ;
Rothman, 2009 ). Moreover, in the absence of appropriate theory testing, theories are unable to be
reﬁned to enhance intervention e ﬀectiveness over time (Davis et al., 2015 ). Collecting empirical
data within a theoretical framework permits the accumulation of evidence across di ﬀerent contexts,
populations, and behaviours (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ). eHealth-based interventions provide vast
potential for testing and advancing behaviour change theories, generating large amounts of ecolo-gically valid, real-time, and objective data (Michie, Yardley, et al., 2017 ).
Implications for research practice
While some interventions incorporated elements from a referenced theory, it was rare that all
theoretical constructs within a particular theory were targeted by the intervention; and that
valid measures of theoretical constructs were measured and tested pre and postintervention deliv-ery. Intervention designers and evaluators need to improve theory reporting and application.
Methods such as intervention mapping may assist (Eldredge et al., 2016 ; Kok et al., 2016 ) and
ontologies that guide the speci ﬁcation of relationships between BCTs, mechanisms of action,
modes of delivery, populations, settings, and types of behaviour are available (Michie, Carey, etal.,2017 ). Moving forward explicit and detailed reporting of theory use is recommended and
called for. High levels of theory application and reporting enables empirical assessment of the
utility of theories, facilitates the re ﬁnement of theory, and advances the cumulative knowledge
base (Michie & Johnston, 2012 ; Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ).
In the same way tools such as the Consolidated Standards for Reporting Trials and the Transparent
Reporting of Evaluations with Non-Randomised Designs promote transparency in the reporting of a
trial’s design, conduct, analysis and interpretation, the TCS can be used as a checklist by researchers
when reporting how theory was used. Improved reporting of theory use will clarify how and wheretheory has been applied (or not) and will permit an evidence base to be accumulated. We rec-
ommend that theory application be reported to promote transparency and enable critical appraisal.
Strengths and limitations
This study assesses and quanti ﬁes the extent that theory use is reported in eHealth weight manage-
ment interventions targeting young adults. Conducted in accordance with PRISMA guidelines, with a310 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
well-de ﬁned set of research questions, this study provides a transparent, reproducible, and updatable
review. The method of theory assessment was detailed, objective and reliable, permitting omissions
in theory application and reporting to be identi ﬁed. Moreover, papers with strong levels of reported
theory use (e.g., Ashton et al., 2017 and Simons et al., 2018 ) were identi ﬁed and these can serve as
guides for other researchers to improve levels of theory application and reporting.
Furthermore, review ﬁndings highlight the importance (and urgency) of moving current practice
away from the reporting of intervention e ﬀectiveness as one complete and cohesive entity, to
unpacking the black box, and clearly reporting how and when theory has been applied. Explicitreporting of how and when theory is applied will permit identi ﬁcation of the underlying mechanisms
of action and enable their subsequent e ﬀects to be con ﬁrmed via meta-analytic studies. Over time
this will advance our understanding of which theories work, for whom, how, why, and when; andinform future prescriptions of how best to apply theory in order to enhance intervention outcomes.
Several limitations, many of which represent opportunities for future research, are acknowledged.
First, the search parameters employed were speci ﬁc to review objectives and consequently the
number of studies was limited to eHealth weight management interventions targeting young
adults. Future research in other behavioural change contexts is recommended to extend our under-
standing of reported theory use and alternate search strategies with broadened search terms are rec-ommended. Conversely, behavioural outcomes identi ﬁed in this study varied greatly; therefore,
future reviews may opt to focus on one speci ﬁc behavioural driver of weight management (e.g., phys-
ical activity or healthy eating) to permit direct comparisons across studies.
Second, Items 14 and 16 did not account for study-level variations, namely, sample size. As a
consequence, studies reporting signi ﬁcant changes in theory-relevant predictors in favour of the
intervention may inadvertently reject a true null hypothesis (Type I error) and similarly studiesreporting null e ﬀects may fail to reject a false null hypothesis (Type II error) owing to a small
sample size. A meta-analytic approach can assist. Ideally, meta-regression requires a suﬃ cient
level of power to reliably detect e ﬀect size. Research suggests that more than 200 studies are
required for 80% power to detect modest associations in meta-regressions (Hempel et al., 2013 ).
It is our hope that in time the scienti ﬁc research community will be able to empirically test the the-
ory-eﬀectiveness hypothesis with su ﬃcient power to better understand how and when theory
should be applied to enhance intervention outcomes. However, in the absence of high levels of
theory application and reporting across multiple studies, any attempts to test the theory-e ﬀective-
ness hypothesis are premature. With only 24 eligible studies retrieved from our systematic search,
and overall low levels of reported theory use, more work is needed before attempts to test the
theory-e ﬀectiveness hypothesis can be undertaken in this context; and before we can begin build-
ing an accurate and reliable evidence base that can guide weight management eﬀ orts tailored to
young adults.
Third, composite scores calculated for total reported theory use in this study are a crude measure
giving all items in the TCS equal weight. While this approach can assess and quantify the extent of
reported theory use, future research should be directed towards developing a scoring scheme that
provides weightings based upon relative importance of TCS items. Measures of relativity could be
obtained from meta-regressions examining the association between TCS items and interventioneﬀectiveness. Lastly, in this study we could only code for reported theory use. We do note that a
lack of reporting of theory use does not necessarily equate to a lack of theory use. Therefore, failuresto clearly report theory use for studies identi ﬁed in this review could have led to misclassi ﬁcations
and low scoring of included studies.
Conclusions
This study assessed the extent of reported theory use in eHealth weight management interventionstargeting young adults using the TCS (Michie & Prestwich, 2010 ) and examined how theory may be
applied to enhance weight-related outcomes in interventions. Guided by the comprehensive TCS,HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 311
this review identi ﬁedhow theory was applied in intervention development and evaluation. Findings
from this review highlight that while most studies mentioned a theory, very few integrated the refer-
enced theory (or theories) throughout allintervention stages. Furthermore, no study used interven-
tion results to build and/or re ﬁne theory to improve future intervention design and evaluation.
Results indicate that weight-related outcomes may be enhanced when at least one or more theoreti-cal constructs are explicitly linked to an intervention technique and when theoretical constructs are
included in evaluations. A number of TCS items did not have su ﬃcient numbers to run chi-square
tests for association; consequently, our understanding of which components of theory application are
(or are not) driving weight-related outcomes in the context of eHealth weight management interven-
tions targeting young adults remains limited. In sum, this review serves as a ﬁrst attempt to evaluate
extent of reported theory use in the context of eHealth weight management interventions targeting
young adults, thereby providing a foundation for improving the theoretical base of future interven-
tions in this context.
Disclosure statement
No potential con ﬂict of interest was reported by the authors.
ORCID
Taylor Willmott http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4649-6342
Bo Pang http://orcid.org/0000-0003-3227-3612
Sharyn Rundle-Thiele http://orcid.org/0000-0003-2536-3767
Abi Badejo http://orcid.org/0000-0003-0669-1319
References
Adams, K. F., Leitzmann, M. F., Ballard-Barbash, R., Albanes, D., Harris, T. B., Hollenbeck, A., & Kipnis, V. ( 2014 ). Body mass
and weight change in adults in relation to mortality risk. American Journal of Epidemiology, 179(2), 135 –144. doi:10.
1093/aje/kwt254
Allman-Farinelli, M., Partridge, S. R., McGeechan, K., Balestracci, K., Hebden, L., Wong, A., …Bauman, A. ( 2016 ). A mobile
health lifestyle program for prevention of weight gain in young adults (TXT2BFiT): Nine-month outcomes of a random-
ized controlled trial. JMIR MHealth and UHealth ,4(2),doi:10.2196/mhealth.5768
Ashton, L. M., Morgan, P. J., Hutchesson, M. J., Rollo, M. E., & Collins, C. E. ( 2017 ). Feasibility and preliminary e ﬃcacy of the
‘HEYMAN ’healthy lifestyle program for young men: A pilot randomised controlled trial. Nutrition Journal ,16(1), 1– 17.
doi:10.1186/s12937-017-0227-8
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW). ( 2017 ). Overweight and obesity. Retrieved from https://www.aihw.gov.
au/reports-data/behaviours-risk-factors/overweight-obesity/data
Avery, K. N., Donovan, J. L., Horwood, J., & Lane, J. A. ( 2013 ). Behavior theory for dietary interventions for cancer preven-
tion: A systematic review of utilization and e ﬀectiveness in creating behavior change. Cancer Causes & Control ,24(3),
409–420. doi:10.1007/s10552-012-9995-9
Ayling, K., Brierley, S., Johnson, B., Heller, S., & Eiser, C. ( 2015 ). Eﬃ cacy of theory-based interventions for young people with
type 1 diabetes: A systematic review and meta-analysis. British Journal of Health Psychology ,20(2), 428 –446. doi:10.
1111/bjhp.12131
Bertz, F., Pacanowski, C. R., & Levitsky, D. A. ( 2015 ). Frequent self-weighing with electronic graphic feedback to prevent
age-related weight gain in young adults. Obesity ,23(10), 2009 –2014. doi:10.1002/oby.21211
Bhattarai, N., Prevost, A. T., Wright, A. J., Charlton, J., Rudisill, C., & Gulliford, M. C. ( 2013 ). Eﬀectiveness of interventions to
promote healthy diet in primary care: Systematic review and meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. BMC Public
Health ,13(1), 1203. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-13-1203
Black, N., Mullan, B., & Sharpe, L. ( 2016 ). Computer-delivered interventions for reducing alcohol consumption: Meta-analy-
sis and meta-regression using behaviour change techniques and theory. Health Psychology Review ,10(3), 341 –357.
doi:10.1080/17437199.2016.1168268
Bluethmann, S. M., Bartholomew, L. K., Murphy, C. C., & Vernon, S. W. ( 2017 ). Use of theory in behavior change interven-
tions: An analysis of programs to increase physical activity in posttreatment breast cancer survivors. Health Education
& Behavior ,44(2), 245 –253. doi:10.1177/1090198116647712312 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
Bolton, R. N., Parasuraman, A., Hoefnagels, A., Migchels, N., Kabadayi, S., Gruber, T., …Solnet, D. ( 2013 ). Understanding
generation Y and their use of social media: A review and research agenda. Journal of Service Management ,24(3),
245–267. doi:10.1108/09564231311326987
Brennan, L., Previte, J., & Fry, M. ( 2016 ). Social marketing ’s consumer myopia: Applying a behavioural ecological model to
address wicked problems. Journal of Social Marketing ,6(3), 219 –239. doi:10.1108/JSOCM-12-2015-0079
Cameron, D., Epton, T., Norman, P., Sheeran, P., Harris, P. R., Webb, T. L., …Shah, I. ( 2015 ). A theory-based online health
behaviour intervention for new university students (U@ Uni: LifeGuide): Results from a repeat randomized controlled
trial. Trials ,16(1), 555. doi:10.1186/s13063-015-1092-4
Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. ( 1982 ). Control theory: A useful conceptual framework for personality –social, clinical, and
health psychology. Psychological Bulletin ,92(1), 111 –135. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.92.1.111
Chung, A. E., Skinner, A. C., Hasty, S. E., & Perrin, E. M. ( 2017 ). Tweeting to health: A novel mHealth intervention using ﬁtbits
and twitter to foster healthy lifestyles. Clinical Pediatrics ,56(1), 26– 32.doi:10.1177/0009922816653385
Craig, P., Dieppe, P., Macintyre, S., Michie, S., Nazareth, I., & Petticrew, M. ( 2008 ). Developing and evaluating complex inter-
ventions: The new Medical research Council guidance. British Medical Journal ,37(7676), 979 –983. doi:10.1136/bmj.
a1655
Dalgetty, R., Miller, C. B., & Dombrowski, S. U. ( 2019 ). Examining the theory-e ﬀectiveness hypothesis: A systematic review
of systematic reviews. British Journal of Health Psychology, doi:10.1111/bjhp.12356
Davis, R., Campbell, R., Hildon, Z., Hobbs, L., & Michie, S. ( 2015). Theories of behaviour and behaviour change across the social
and behavioural sciences: A scoping review. Health Psychology Review ,9(3), 323– 344. doi:10.1080/17437199.2014.941722
de Mutsert, R., Sun, Q., Willett, W. C., Hu, F. B., & van Dam, R. M. ( 2014 ). Overweight in early adulthood, adult weight
change, and risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular diseases, and certain cancers in men: A cohort study. American
Journal of Epidemiology ,179(11), 1353 –1365. doi:10.1093/aje/kwu052
Dennis, E. A., Potter, K. L., Estabrooks, P. A., & Davy, B. M. ( 2012 ). Weight gain prevention for college freshmen: Comparing
two social cognitive theory-based interventions with and without explicit self-regulation training. Journal of Obesity ,
2012, 803769-10. doi:10.1155/2012/803769
de Zwaan, M. ( 2012 ). Could surgery have a better long-term e ﬀect on psychopathology than evidence-based psychother-
apy? Pros and cons of bariatric surgery in the treatment of obesity. Verhaltenstherapie ,22, 199 –203. doi:10.1159/
000341543
Diep, C. S., Chen, T. A., Davies, V. F., Baranowski, J. C., & Baranowski, T. ( 2014 ). Inﬂuence of behavioral theory on fruit and
vegetable intervention e ﬀectiveness among children: A meta-analysis. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior ,46
(6), 506 –546. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2014.05.012
Dobbs, R., Sawers, C., Thompson, F., Manyika, J., Woetzel, J. R., Child, P., …Spatharou, A. ( 2014 ). Overcoming obesity: An
initial economic analysis. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Business%20Functions/
Economic%20Studies%20TEMP/Our%20Insights/How%20the%20world%20could%20better%20 ﬁght%20obesity/
MGI_Overcoming_obesity_Full_report.ashx
Dombrowski, S. U., Knittle, K., Avenell, A., Araujo-Soares, V., & Sniehotta, F. F. ( 2014 , May 14). Long term maintenance of
weight loss with non-surgical interventions in obese adults: Systematic review and meta-analyses of randomised con-
trolled trials. British Medical Journal ,348(6), g2646 –g2646. doi:10.1136/bmj.g2646
Eldredge, L. K. B., Markham, C. M., Ruiter, R. A., Kok, G., Fernandez, M. E., & Parcel, G. S. ( 2016 ).Planning health promotion
programs: An intervention mapping approach . San Francisco, CA: Wiley.
Epton, T., Norman, P., Dadzie, A.-S., Harris, P. R., Webb, T. L., Sheeran, P., …Shah, I. ( 2014 ). A theory-based online health
behaviour intervention for new university students (U@ Uni): Results from a randomised controlled trial. BMC Public
Health ,14(1), 563. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-14-563
Fildes, A., Charlton, J., Rudisill, C., Littlejohns, P., Prevost, A. T., & Gulliford, M. C. ( 2015 ). Probability of an obese person
attaining normal body weight: Cohort study using electronic health records. American Journal of Public Health ,105
(9), e54 –e59. doi:10.2105/AJPH.2015.302773
Flegal, K. M., Kruszon-Moran, D., Carroll, M. D., Fryar, C. D., & Ogden, C. L. ( 2016 ). Trends in obesity among adults in the
United States, 2005 to 2014. JAMA ,315(21), 2284 –2291. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.6458
Free, C., Phillips, G., Galli, L., Watson, L., Felix, L., Edwards, P., …Haines, A. ( 2013 ). The e ﬀectiveness of mobile-health tech-
nology-based health behaviour change or disease management interventions for health care consumers: A systematicreview. PLoS Medicine ,10(1), e1001362. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001362
Gardner, B., Wardle, J., Poston, L., & Croker, H. ( 2011 ). Changing diet and physical activity to reduce gestational weight
gain: A meta-analysis. Obesity Reviews ,12(7), e602 –e620. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2011.00884.x
Garnett, C., Crane, D., Brown, J., Kaner, E., Beyer, F., Muirhead, C., …Michie, S. ( 2018 ). Reported theory use by digital inter-
ventions for hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption, and association with e ﬀectiveness: Meta-regression. Journal
of Medical Internet Research ,20(2), e69. doi:10.2196/jmir.8807
Gill, T., King, L., & Webb, K. ( 2005 ). Best options for promoting healthy weight and preventing weight gain in NSW.
Retrieved from https://sydney.edu.au/science/molecular_bioscience/cphn/pdfs/healthy_weight_report.pdf
Glanz, K., & Bishop, D. B. ( 2010 ). The role of behavioral science theory in development and implementation of public
health interventions. Annual Review of Public Health ,31, 399 –418. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.012809.103604HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 313
Gow, R. W., Trace, S. E., & Mazzeo, S. E. ( 2010 ). Preventing weight gain in ﬁrst year college students: An online intervention
to prevent the “freshman ﬁfteen ”.Eating Behaviors ,11(1), 33 –39.doi:10.1016/j.eatbeh.2009.08.005
Gravetter, F. J., & Wallnau, L. B. ( 2016 ).Statistics for the behavioral sciences. Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
Greene, G. W., White, A. A., Hoerr, S. L., Lohse, B., Schembre, S. M., Riebe, D., …Phillips, B. W. ( 2012 ). Impact of an online
healthful eating and physical activity program for college students. American Journal of Health Promotion, 27(2), e47 –
e58. doi:10.4278/ajhp.110606-QUAN-239
Gurevitch, J., Koricheva, J., Nakagawa, S., & Stewart, G. ( 2018 ). Meta-analysis and the science of research synthesis. Nature ,
555(7695), 175 –182. doi:10.1038/nature25753
Hardeman, W., Sutton, S., Gri ﬃn, S., Johnston, M., White, A., Wareham, N. J., & Kinmonth, A. L. ( 2005 ). A causal modelling
approach to the development of theory-based behaviour change programmes for trial evaluation. Health Education
Research ,20(6), 676 –687. doi:10.1093/her/cyh022
Harvey-Berino, J., Pope, L., Gold, B. C., Leonard, H., & Belliveau, C. ( 2012 ). Undergrad and overweight: An online behavioral
weight management program for college students. Journal of Nutrition Education and Behavior, 44(6), 604 –608. doi:10.
1016/j.jneb.2012.04.016
Hebden, L., Chey, T., & Allman-Farinelli, M. ( 2012 ). Lifestyle intervention for preventing weight gain in young adults: A
systematic review and meta-analysis of RCTs. Obesity Reviews ,13(8), 692 –710. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2012.00990.x
Hebden, L., Cook, A., Ploeg, H. P., King, L., Bauman, A., & Allman-Farinelli, M. ( 2014 ). A mobile health intervention for
weight management among young adults: A pilot randomised controlled trial. Journal of Human Nutrition and
Dietetics ,27(4), 322 –332. doi:10.1111/jhn.12155
Hekler, E. B., Klasnja, P., Riley, W. T., Buman, M. P., Huberty, J., Rivera, D. E., & Martin, C. A. ( 2016a ). Agile science: Creating
useful products for behavior change in the real world. Translational Behavioral Medicine ,6(2), 317 –328. doi:10.1007/
s13142-016-0395-7
Hekler, E. B., Michie, S., Pavel, M., Rivera, D. E., Collins, L. M., Jimison, H. B., …Spruijt-Metz, D. ( 2016b ). Advancing models
and theories for digital behavior change interventions. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,51(5), 825 –832. doi:10.
1016/j.amepre.2016.06.013
Hempel, S., Miles, J. N., Booth, M. J., Wang, Z., Morton, S. C., & Shekelle, P. G. ( 2013 ). Risk of bias: A simulation study of power
to detect study-level moderator e ﬀects in meta-analysis. Systematic Reviews ,2(1), 107. doi:10.1186/2046-4053-2-107
Hutchesson, M. J., Hulst, J., & Collins, C. E. ( 2013 ). Weight management interventions targeting young women: A systema-
tic review. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics ,113(6), 795 –802. doi:10.1016/j.jand.2013.01.015
Intille, S. S., Kukla, C., Farzanfar, R., & Bakr, W. ( 2003 ). Just-in-time technology to encourage incremental, dietary behavior
change. AMIA…Annual Symposium Proceedings. AMIA Symposium ,2003, 874.
Kattelmann, K. K., Bredbenner, C. B., White, A. A., Greene, G. W., Hoerr, S. L., Kidd, T., …Morrell, J. S. ( 2014 ). The e ﬀects of
young adults eating and active for health (YEAH): A theory-based web-delivered intervention. Journal of Nutrition
Education and Behavior ,46(6), S27 –S41. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2014.08.007
Kerr, D. A., Harray, A. J., Pollard, C. M., Dhaliwal, S. S., Delp, E. J., Howat, P. A., …Boushey, C. J. ( 2016 ). The connecting health
and technology study: A 6-month randomized controlled trial to improve nutrition behaviours using a mobile food
record and text messaging support in young adults. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical
Activity ,13(1), doi:10.1186/s12966-016-0376-8
Kim, H. Y. ( 2017 ). Statistical notes for clinical researchers: Chi-squared test and Fisher ’s exact test. Restorative Dentistry &
Endodontics ,42(2), 152 –155. doi:10.5395/rde.2017.42.2.152
Kok, G., Gottlieb, N. H., Peters, G. Y., Mullen, P. D., Parcel, G. S., Ruiter, R. A. C., …Bartholomew, L. K. ( 2016 ). A taxonomy of
behaviour change methods: An intervention mapping approach. Health Psychology Review ,10(3), 297–312. doi:10.
1080/17437199.2015.1077155
LaChausse, R. G. ( 2012 ). My student body: Eﬀ ects of an internet-based prevention program to decrease obesity among
college students. Journal of American College Health ,60(4), 324 –330. doi:10.1080/07448481.2011.623333
Lara, J., Hobbs, N., Moynihan, P. J., Meyer, T. D., Adamson, A. J., Errington, L., …Mathers, J. C. ( 2014 ). Eﬀ ectiveness of
dietary interventions among adults of retirement age: A systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. BMC Medicine ,12(1), 60 –60.doi:10.1186/1741-7015-12-60
Laska, M. N., Pelletier, J. E., Larson, N. I., & Story, M. ( 2012 ). Interventions for weight gain prevention during the transition
to young adulthood: A review of the literature. Journal of Adolescent Health ,50(4), 324 –333. doi:10.1016/j.jadohealth.
2012.01.016
Lenhart, A., Purcell, K., Smith, A., & Zickuhr, K. ( 2010 ). Social media & mobile internet use among teens and young adults.
Retrieved from https:// ﬁles.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED525056.pdf
Levitsky, D. A., Garay, J., Nausbaum, M., Neighbors, L., & DellaValle, D. M. ( 2006 ). Monitoring weight daily blocks the fresh-
man weight gain: A model for combating the epidemic of obesity. International Journal of Obesity ,30(6), 1003 –1010.
doi:10.1038/sj.ijo.0803221
Liberati, A., Altman, D. G., Tetzla ﬀ, J., Mulrow, C., Gøtzsche, P. C., Ioannidis, J. P., …Moher, D. ( 2009 ). The PRISMA statement
for reporting systematic reviews and meta-analyses of studies that evaluate health care interventions: Explanation andelaboration. PLoS Medicine ,6(7), e1000100. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1000100
Lloyd-Jones, D. M., Liu, K., Colangelo, L. A., Yan, L. L., Klein, L., Loria, C. M., …Savage, P. ( 2007 ). Consistently stable or
decreased body mass index in young adulthood and longitudinal changes in metabolic syndrome components:314 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
The coronary artery risk development in young adults study. Circulation ,115(8), 1004 –1011. doi:10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.106.648642
Loria, C., Arteaga, S. S., Belle, S., Signore, C., & Riley, W. ( 2011 ). Early adult reduction of weight through lifestyle interven-
tion (early) trials: Using innovative technologies in randomized controlled trials targeting weight control among
young adults. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,41(1), s133. Retrieved from https://insights.ovid.com/annals-behavioral-
medicine/abvm/2011/04/001/early-adult-reduction-weight-lifestyle/522/00124294
Luca, N. R., & Suggs, L. S. ( 2013 ). Theory and model use in social marketing health interventions. Journal of Health
Communication ,18(1), 20– 40.doi:10.1080/10810730.2012.688243
Lustria, M. L. A., Cortese, J., Noar, S. M., & Glueckauf, R. L. ( 2009 ). Computer-tailored health interventions delivered over the
Web: Review and analysis of key components. Patient Education and Counseling ,74(2), 156 –173. doi:10.1016/j.pec.
2008.08.023
Lytle, L. A., Laska, M. N., Linde, J. A., Moe, S. G., Nanney, M. S., Hannan, P. J., & Erickson, D. J. ( 2017 ). Weight-gain reduction
among 2-year college students: The CHOICES RCT. American Journal of Preventive Medicine ,52(2), 183 –191. doi:10.
1016/j.amepre.2016.10.012
McEwan, D., Beauchamp, M. R., Kouvousis, C., Ray, C. M., Wyrough, A., & Rhodes, R. E. ( 2019 ). Examining the active ingre-
dients of physical activity interventions underpinned by theory versus no stated theory: A meta-analysis. Health
Psychology Review ,13(1), 1– 17.doi:10.1080/17437199.2018.1547120
McGlashan, J., Hayward, J., Brown, A., Owen, B., Millar, L., Johnstone, M., …Allender, S. ( 2018 ). Comparing complex per-
spectives on obesity drivers: Action-driven communities and evidence-oriented experts. Obesity Science & Practice ,4
(6), 575 –581. doi:10.1002/osp4.306
McTigue, K. M., Garrett, J. M., & Popkin, B. M. ( 2002 ). The natural history of the development of obesity in a cohort of
young US adults between 1981 and 1998. Annals of Internal Medicine ,136(12), 857 –864. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-
136-12-200206180-00006
Mehtälä, M. A., Sääkslahti, A., Inkinen, M., & Poskiparta, Marita E. ( 2014 ). A socio-ecological approach to physical activity
interventions in childcare: A systematic review. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity ,11(1),
22.doi:10.1186/1479-5868-11-22
Michie,
S., & Abraham, C. ( 2004 ). Interventions to change health behaviours: Evidence-based or evidence-inspired?
Psychology & Health ,19(1), 29– 49.doi:10.1080/0887044031000141199
Michie, S., Carey, R. N., Johnston, M., Rothman, A. J., De Bruin, M., Kelly, M. P., & Connell, L. E. ( 2017 ). From theory-inspired
to theory-based interventions: A protocol for developing and testing a methodology for linking behaviour changetechniques to theoretical mechanisms of action. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,52(6), 1– 12.doi:10.1007/s12160-
016-9816-6
Michie, S., & Johnston, M. ( 2004 ). Changing clinical behaviour by making guidelines speci ﬁc.British Medical Journal ,328
(7435), 343 –345. doi:10.1136/bmj.328.7435.343
Michie, S., & Johnston, M. ( 2012 ). Theories and techniques of behaviour change: Developing a cumulative science of
behaviour change. Health Psychology Review ,6(1), 1 –6.doi:10.1080/17437199.2012.654964
Michie, S., Johnston, M., Francis, J., Hardeman, W., & Eccles, M. ( 2008 ). From theory to intervention: Mapping theoretically
derived behavioural determinants to behaviour change techniques. Applied Psychology: An International Review ,57(4),
660–680. doi:10.1111/j.1464-0597.2008.00341.x
Michie, S., & Prestwich, A. ( 2010 ). Are interventions theory-based? Development of a theory coding scheme. Health
Psychology ,29(1), 1 –8.doi:10.1037/a0016939
Michie, S., Yardley, L., West, R., Patrick, K., & Greaves, F. ( 2017 ). Developing and evaluating digital interventions to promote
behavior change in health and health care: Recommendations resulting from an international workshop. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 19(6), e232. doi:10.2196/jmir.7126
Muñoz, L. R., La France, K., Dominguez, D., Goei, K., Herbers, S., Gunter, M. D., …Jones, M. E. ( 2014 ). Text messaging as a
tool to increase physical activity in college students. Physical Educator, 71(3), 442 –458.
NCD Risk Factor Collaboration. ( 2016 ). Trends in adult body-mass index in 200 countries from 1975 to 2014: A pooled
analysis of 1698 population-based measurement studies with 19.2 million participants. The Lancet ,387(10026),
1377 –1396. doi:10.10
 16/S0140-6736(16)30054-X
Ng, M., Fleming, T., Robinson, M., Thomson, B., Graetz, N., Margono, C., …Gakidou, E. ( 2014 ). Global, regional, and national
prevalence of overweight and obesity in children and adults during 1980 –2013: A systematic analysis for the global
burden of disease study 2013. The Lancet ,384(9945), 766 –781. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60460-8 ’
Nguyen, T., & Lau, D. C. W. ( 2012 ). The obesity epidemic and its impact on hypertension. Canadian Journal of Cardiology ,
28(3), 326 –333. doi:10.1016/j.cjca.2012.01.001
Nikolaou, C. K., Hankey, C. R., & Lean, M. E. J. ( 2015 ). Elearning approaches to prevent weight gain in young adults: A ran-
domized controlled study. Obesity ,23(12), 2377 –2384. doi:10.1002/oby.21237
Noar, S. M., & Zimmerman, R. S. ( 2005 ). Health behavior theory and cumulative knowledge regarding health behaviors:
Are we moving in the right direction? Health Education Research ,20(3), 275 –290. doi:10.1093/her/cyg113
Oh, H., Rizo, C., Enkin, M., & Jadad, A. ( 2005 ). What is eHealth (3): A systematic review of published de ﬁnitions. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 7(1), e1. doi:10.2196/jmir.7.1.e1HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 315
Oosterveen, E., Tzelepis, F., Ashton, L., & Hutchesson, M. J. ( 2017 ). A systematic review of eHealth behavioral interventions
targeting smoking, nutrition, alcohol, physical activity and/or obesity for young adults. Preventive Medicine, 99, 197 –
206. doi:10.1016/j.ypmed.2017.01.009
Painter, J. E., Borba, C. P., Hynes, M., Mays, D., & Glanz, K. ( 2008 ). The use of theory in health behavior research from 2000 to
2005: A systematic review. Annals of Behavioral Medicine ,35(3), 358 –362. doi:10.1007/s12160-008-9042-y
Partridge, S. R., Balestracci, K., Wong, A. T. Y., Hebden, L., McGeechan, K., Denney-Wilson, E., & Harris, M. F. ( 2015 ). Eﬀective
strategies to recruit young adults into the TXT2BFiT mHealth randomized controlled trial for weight gain prevention.
JMIR Research Protocols ,4(2), e66. doi:10.2196/resprot.4268
Partridge, S., Juan, S. H., McGeechan, K., Bauman, A., & Allman-Farinelli, M. ( 2015 ). Poor quality of external validity report-
ing limits generalizability of overweight and/or obesity lifestyle prevention interventions in young adults: A systematic
review. Obesity Reviews ,16(1), 13– 31.doi:10.1111/obr.12233
Poobalan, A. S., Aucott, L. S., Precious, E., Crombie, I. K., & Smith, W. C. S. ( 2010 ). Weight loss interventions in young people
(18 to 25 year olds): A systematic review. Obesity Reviews ,11(8), 580 –592. doi:10.1111/j.1467-789X.2009.00673.x
Portnoy, D. B., Ferrer, R. A., Bergman, H. E., & Klein, W. M. P. ( 2014 ). Changing deliberative and a ﬀective responses to health
risk: A meta-analysis. Health Psychology Review ,8(3), 296 –318. doi:10.1080/17437199.2013.798829
Prestwich, A., Sniehotta, F. F., Whittington, C., Dombrowski, S. U., Rogers, L., & Michie, S. ( 2014 ). Does theory in ﬂuence the
eﬀectiveness of health behavior interventions? Meta-analysis. Health Psychology ,33(5), 465 –474. doi:10.1037/
a0032853
Prestwich, A., Webb, T. L., & Conner, M. ( 2015 ). Using theory to develop and test interventions to promote changes in
health behaviour: Evidence, issues, and recommendations. Current Opinion in Psychology ,5,1–5.doi:10.1016/j.
copsyc.2015.02.011
Proietto, J. ( 2011 ). Why is treating obesity so di ﬃcult? Justi ﬁcation for the role of bariatric surgery. Medical Journal of
Australia ,195(3), 144 –146. Retrieved from https://www.mja.com.au/system/ ﬁles/issues/195_03_010811/pro11117_
fm.pdf
Protogerou, C., & Johnson, B. T. ( 2014 ). Factors underlying the success of behavioral HIV-prevention interventions for ado-
lescents: A meta-review. AIDS and Behavior ,18(10), 1847 –1863. doi:10.1007/s10461-014-0807-y
Reilly, J. J., El-Hamdouchi, A., Diouf, A., Monyeki, A., & Somda, S. A. ( 2018 ). Determining the worldwide prevalence of
obesity. The Lancet ,391(10132), 1773 –1774. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(18)30794-3
Riley, W. T., Rivera, D. E., Atienza, A. A., Nilsen, W., Allison, S. M., & Mermelstein, R. ( 2011 ). Health behavior models in the
age of mobile interventions: Are our theories up to the task? Translational Behavioral Medicine ,1(1), 53– 71.doi:10.
1007/s13142-011-0021-7
Riley, W. T., Serrano, K. J., Nilsen, W., & Atienza, A. A. ( 2015 ). Mobile and wireless technologies in health behavior and the
potential for intensively adaptive interventions. Current Opinion in Psychology ,5,6 7–71.doi:10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.03.024
Rothman, A. J. ( 2004 ).“Is there nothing more practical than a good theory? ”: Why innovations and advances in health
behavior change will arise if interventions are used to test and re ﬁne theory. International Journal of Behavioral
Nutrition and Physical Activity ,1(1), 11. doi:10.1186/1479-5868-1-11
Rothman, A. J. ( 2009 ). Capitalizing on opportunities to reﬁ ne health behavior theories. Health Education & Behavior ,36
(5_suppl.), 150S –155S. doi:10.1177/1090198109340514
Schweitzer, A. L., Ross, J. T., Klein, C. J., Lei, K. Y., & Mackey, E. R. ( 2016 ). An electronic wellness program to improve diet and
exercise in college students: A pilot study. JMIR Research Protocols ,5(1), e29. doi:10.2196/resprot.4855
Sheehan, T., DuBrava, S., DeChello, L., & Fang, Z. ( 2003 ). Rates of weight change for black and white Americans over a
twenty year period. International Journal of Obesity ,27(4), 498 –504.
Simons, D., De Bourdeaudhuij, I., Clarys, P., De Cocker, K., Vandelanotte, C., & Deforche, B. ( 2018 ). Eﬀect and process evalu-
ation of a smartphone app to promote an active lifestyle in lower educated working young adults: Cluster randomizedcontrolled trial. JMIR Mhealth and Uhealth ,6(8), e10003. doi:10.2196/10003
Spring, S., Moller, B., Colangelo, A. C., Siddique, L. A., Roehrig, J., Daviglus, M., …Liu, K. ( 2014 ). Healthy lifestyle change and
subclinical atherosclerosis in young adults: Coronary artery risk development in young adults (CARDIA) study.
Circulation ,130(1), 10– 17.doi:10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.113.005445
Sumithran, P., & Proietto, J. ( 2013 ). The defence of body weight: A physiological basis for weight regain after weight loss.
Clinical Science ,124(4), 231 –241. doi:10.1042/CS20120223
Swinburn, B. A., Sacks, G., Hall, K. D., McPherson, K., Finegood, D. T., Moodie, M. L., & Gortmaker, S. L. ( 2011 ). The global
obesity pandemic: Shaped by global drivers and local environments. The Lancet ,378(9793), 804 –814.
Tate, D. F., Lytle, L. A., Sherwood, N. E., Haire-Joshu, D., Matheson, D., Moore, S. M., …Michie, S. ( 2016 ). Deconstructing
interventions: Approaches to studying behavior change techniques across obesity interventions. Translational
Behavioral Medicine ,6(2), 236 –243. doi:10.1007/s13142-015-0369-1
Taylor, N., Conner, M., & Lawton, R. ( 2012 ). The impact of theory on the e ﬀectiveness of worksite physical activity inter-
ventions: A meta-analysis and meta-regression. Health Psychology Review ,6(1), 33– 73.doi:10.1080/17437199.2010.
533441
Truong, V. D. ( 2014 ). Social marketing: A systematic review of research 1998 –2012. Social Marketing Quarterly ,20(1), 15–
34.doi:10.1177/1524500413517666316 T. WILLMOTT ET AL.
Vandelanotte, C., Müller, A. M., Short, C. E., Hingle, M., Nathan, N., Williams, S. L., …Maher, C. A. ( 2016 ). Past, present, and
future of eHealth and mHealth research to improve physical activity and dietary behaviors. Journal of Nutrition
Education and Behavior ,48(3), 219 –228.e1. doi:10.1016/j.jneb.2015.12.006
Wadsworth, D. D., & Hallam, J. S. ( 2010 ). Eﬀect of a web site intervention on physical activity of college females. American
Journal of Health Behavior, 34(1), 60– 69.doi:10.5993/AJHB.34.1.8
Webb, T. L., Joseph, J., Yardley, L., & Michie, S. ( 2010 ). Using the internet to promote health behavior change: A systematic
review and meta-analysis of the impact of theoretical basis, use of behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery
on eﬃcacy. Journal of Medical Internet Research ,12(1), e4. doi:10.2196/jmir.1376
Weinstein, N. D., & Rothman, A. J. ( 2005 ). Commentary: Revitalizing research on health behavior theories. Health Education
Research ,20(3), 294 –297. doi:10.1093/her/cyg125
West, D., Monroe, C., Turner-McGrievy, G., Sundstrom, B., Larsen, C., Magradey, K., …Brandt, H. ( 2016 ). A technology-
mediated behavioral weight gain prevention intervention for college students: Controlled, quasi-experimental
study. Journal of Medical Internet Research ,18(6), doi:10.2196/jmir.5474
Willmott, T. J., Pang, B., Rundle-Thiele, S., & Badejo, A. ( 2019 ). Weight management in young adults: Systematic review of
electronic health intervention components and outcomes. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 21(2), e10265. doi:10.
2196/10265
Wing, R. R., Tate, D. F., Espeland, M. A., Lewis, C. E., LaRose, J. G., Gorin, A. A., …Ferguson, E. ( 2016 ). Innovative self-regu-
lation strategies to reduce weight gain in young adults: The study of novel approaches to weight gain prevention
(SNAP) randomized clinical trial. JAMA Internal Medicine, 176(6), 755 –762. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2016.1236
Word Health Organisation (WHO). ( 2018 ).eHealth at WHO . Retrieved from https://www.who.int/ehealth/about/en/
World Health Organization (WHO). ( 2011 ).Global status report on noncommunicable diseases 2010. Retrieved from https://
www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/abstract/20113168808
Zheng, Y., Manson, J. E., Yuan, C., Liang, M. H., Grodstein, F., Stampfer, M. J., …Hu, F. B. ( 2017 ). Associations of weight gain
from
early to middle adulthood with major health outcomes later in life. JAMA ,318(3), 255 –269. doi:10.1001/jama.
2017.7092HEALTH PSYCHOLOGY REVIEW 317
