                                 [Health Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209]                                                   [page 57]A study to examine the uses 
of personal strength in relationto mental health recovery inadults with serious mental illnesses: a research protocol
Huiting Xie, Peng Yuan, Song Song Cui,
Melissa Sng Siok Yen
Institute of Mental Health, Singapore 
Abstract
This study will explore the relationships
among strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulness,
stigma experience and mental health recoveryin community-dwelling adults with serious men-tal illnesses. Mental health practices havefocued on psychopathphysiology. Stigma heavilyplagued clients with mental illnesses and is oneof the greatest barriers to mental health recov-ery. Personal strengths like strengths self-effica-cy, people’s confidence in using their personalstrengths, and resourcefulness, the ability tocarry out daily activities, have been linked topositive mental health. However, the linkagebetween strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulnessand mental health recovery remains uncharted.A cross-sectional, descriptive, mixed methodsstudy will be conducted. A funded study by theSigma Theta Tau, Upsilon Eta Chapter, August2013, involving a convenience sample of 100 par-ticipants is planned. Included are communitydwelling adults between 21 to 65 years old hav-ing been diagnosed with serious mental illness-es. Clients with current co-occurring substanceabuse will be excluded. Participants completequestionnaires and undergo an interview.Correlations among the study variables will beexamined. Regression analysis will determine ifrecovery can be predicted by strengths self-effi-cacy, resourcefulness and stigma experience.Interview data will be transcribed and analyzedby thematic analysis. This study will look beyond
clients’ disability to focus on their recovery and
healing capacities such as strengths self-effica-
cy and resourcefulness. Findings will expand
our knowledge about mental health recovery.
Knowledge gained from this study may pave the
way for future nursing strategies to aid recovery
and inform the development of positive,
strengths-based interventions. 
Key points
Why is this research or reviewneeded?
Mental health practices are based heavily onpathological thinking, focusing on problems
and failures in people with mental illnesses. 
Stigma heavily plagued clients and is one of
the greatest barriers to mental health recovery.
Personal strengths such as strengths self-
efficacy and resourcefulness in people withmental illnesses are seldom explored.
What are the main findings?
Key findings of this study will go beyond the
symptoms and disabilities of people with men-tal illnesses to focus on their recovery andhealing capacities.
We hypothesized that strengths self-effica-
cy, resourcefulness, stigma experience will becorrelated with or predictive of mental healthrecovery in community dwelling adults withserious mental illnesses.
How should the findings be used to
influence policy/practice/research/education?
Findings will expand our knowledge about
mental health recovery and positive concepts
such as strengths self-efficacy and resource-fulness.
Approaching mental illnesses positively may
help to reduce stigma that impedes recovery.
Knowledge gained from this study may pave
the way for future nursing strategies to aidrecovery and inform the development of posi-tive, strengths-based interventions. 
Introduction
Mental illnesses are a cause of concern.
Internationally, across countries in America,Europe, Middle East, Africa, and Asia, nine to17% of the population surveyed had someepisodes of mental illnesses in the previousyear.
1In the USA, about 57.7 million people,
26% of adults aged 18 years and older had atleast one mental illness in any given year.
Mental illnesses contribute to health burden
and disability around the world.
1The World
Health Organization reported that an estimat-ed 873,000 people committed suicide yearly,and more than 90% of all cases of suicide wereassociated with mental disorders.
2The situa-
tion can worsen with the global burden result-ing from mental illnesses expected to rise from12.3% in the year 2000 to 14.7% in the year2020.
3 
Serious mental illnesses (SMI), like schizo-
phrenia or major depression, significantly
increase the risk of early mortality. Every year,more people in Singapore die from suicidethan from traffic accidents.
4In Singapore,
about one in 16 people have experienced majordepressive disorder some point in their liveswhile alcohol abuse and obsessive compulsivedisorders affect one in 29 and one in 33 peoplerespectively. The situation is worsen as stigma
associated with mental illnesses inhibits thepublic in Singapore less willing to pay for men-tal healthcare services, and often leads to thesegregation of people with mental health con-ditions away from the public.
4
Background 
Influenced by the mass appeal of the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of MentalDisorders (DSM), mental health practices areheavily aligned with pathological thinking,focusing on human problems and failures.
5In
the past, serious mental illnesses were viewedpessimistically, with the course of illnessbeing deteriorative and treatment being stabi-lization of the illness condition at best even ifoutcomes were not all bad.
6,7
Little attention has been given to positive
approaches to enhance mental health. 8As
health providers paint a gloomy picture of SMIas chronic and irreversible, people with SMI
Correspondence: Huiting Xie, Institute of Mental
Health, Singapore, Buangkok Green MedicalPark, 10 Buangkok View, 539747 Singapore. Tel.: +65.6389.2207.E-mail: hui_ting_xie@imh.com.sg
Key words: Community psychiatric nursing; self-
efficacy; service user perspective; adult psychi-atric nursing; patient perspectives.
Acknowledgements: the study team would like to
acknowledge the Institute of Mental Health,Singapore, Singapore Anglican CommunityServices and Dr Jaclene Zauszniewski, CaseWestern Reserve University, America, for render-ing their support to this proposed study. 
Contributions: the authors contributed equally.Conﬂicts of interest: the authors declare no
potential conﬂict of interest. 
Funding: this study is supported by the Sigma
Theta Tau, Upsilon Eta Chapter Research Grant(August 2013).
Received for publication: 31 December 2013.
Revision received: 17 February 2014.Accepted for publication: 17 February 2014.
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution NonCommercial 3.0 License (CC BY-NC 3.0).
©Copyright H. Xie et al., 2015
Licensee PAGEPress, ItalyHealth Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209doi:10.4081/hpr.2015.2209
                                                  Health Psychology Research 2015; volume 3:2209
Non commercial use only
[page 58]                                                    [Health Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209]also view themselves negatively. Many of them
internalize the stigma and perceive them-selves negatively,
9,10leading to decreased psy-
chological health (e.g. lowered self-esteem)
and impaired role performance. 
Recovery from mental illnesses has to be the
guiding vision for mental health services. 6The
National Institute of Mental Health states pro-motion of recovery, not merely the reduction ofsymptoms, as their ultimate goal.
11For people
with mental illnesses, recovery gives them asense of hope that they can continue to leadnormal lives despite their illnesses.
12However,
psychopathology is still very much evident inmental health practices today and we are still adistance away from achieving the vision ofrecovery.
7
Stigma is one of the biggest barriers to
recovery. America’s Surgeon General statedthat stigma should not be tolerated to reducethe illness burden and improve recovery.
11The
mental health blueprint in Singapore high-lights the need to build resilience and reducestigma to achieve recovery.
4
While stigma impedes recovery, personal
strengths have been linked to mentalhealth.
13,14Personal strengths are the person’s
positive traits that either create a sense of per-sonal accomplishment or enhance their abili-ties to provide near perfect performance in aspecific task.
14,15A large-scale web-based study
found that recovery from psychological disor-ders was associated with greater personalcharacter strengths.
13Additionally, results
from another study suggested that clientsengaged in a recovery orientated program thatemphasized the development and use of per-sonal strengths had better recovery.
16
Resourcefulness, the ability to carry out
daily activities by themselves (personalresourcefulness) or by seeking help (socialresourcefulness), has also been linked toimprovements in mental health. In a study of104 cognitively intact elders dealing with thestressor of relocation, resourcefulness madethe relocation process more psychologicallypleasant.
17In two studies relating resourceful-
ness to depression in the caregivers’ popula-tion, resourcefulness was negatively related todepressive symptoms.
18,19
Research gaps
Even if personal strengths have been linked
to mental health, 13,14the impact of these in
people with SMI is not known as mental healthpractices still tends to be focused on investi-gating problems in the person, rather thantheir personal strengths. Little is known aboutthe perceived ability to use personal strengths(strengths self-efficacy) in people with mentalhealth issues. Resourcefulness has also nei-ther been examined in people with mentalhealth issues nor in relation to mental healthrecovery.Theoretical framework
The Community Vulnerability (CV) frame-
work guides this study. The CV model has
three main constructs: stressors, assets andoutcomes. Stressors and assets both impactthe outcome. When assets are low and stres-sors are high, the community becomes vulner-able to adverse outcomes.
20If assets are strong
enough to overcome stressors, then the out-come can be favorable. In this study, the CVmodel is applied to individuals in the commu-nity with mental health recovery as the out-come. Stigma is conceptualized as a stressorthat hinders recovery while personal strengthslike strengths self-efficacy and resourceful-ness are conceptualized as human assets thatwhen sufficient are able to overcome theeffects of stressors, leading to desirable out-come like recovery. 
Significance
This study goes beyond the symptoms and
disabilities of people with SMI to focus on theirrecovery and healing capacities. The focus ison positive attributes such as strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulness and whether theyinfluence mental health recovery. 
Personal strengths are newer concepts in
the psychiatric arena and the findings may bea step towards expanding the knowledge basefor positive concepts such as strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulness, and mental healthrecovery. Approaching mental illnesses posi-tively may also help to reduce the stigma thatimpedes mental health recovery. Knowledgegained from this study may pave the way forfuture nursing strategies to aid mental healthrecovery.
The study
Aims
This study aims to examine if the use of per-
sonal strengths influence mental health recov-ery in adults with serious mental illnesses.The major variables under study are: i)
strengths self-efficacy, ii) resourcefulness, iii)stigma experience and iv) mental health
recovery.
The following research questions will be
addressed. In community-dwelling adults withserious mental illnesses (SMI); i) What arethe associations among strengths self-efficacy,resourcefulness, stigma experience and men-tal health recovery? ii) Do strengths self-effi-cacy, resourcefulness, and stigma experiencepredict mental health recovery? iii) If predic-tions are significant, do the predictions stillhold after controlling for related socio-demo-graphic covariates? iv) How do participantsuse their personal strengths pertaining totheir mental health?Design
A cross-sectional, descriptive, predictive,
mixed methods design will be used in this
study that is set in the Singapore community.Literature on the variable strengths self-effica-cy is limited, and mental health recovery andstigma experience has not been examinedmuch from the patients’ perspective. Since lit-tle is known about the phenomenon, a descrip-tive study design allows a large amount ofinformation to be collected quickly and eco-nomically.
21However, one setback of a descrip-
tive design using surveys, is that informationcollected can be superficial.
21Hence, this study
will include a qualitative component as part ofa mixed method study design so that words ornarrative information generated from thestudy can complement the quantitative analy-sis of surveys.
22A cross-sectional study design
measures all the variables at a single timepoint. It is well-known that people with mentalillnesses often have trouble adhering to treat-ment and follow-up regime. The attrition ratesof participation may be high and the power ofthe study diminishes with decreasing samplesize if this was to be a longitudinal study. Inaddition, the main outcome of interest, recov-ery, in the study though may fluctuate but doesnot change greatly over a short period of time,hence a cross-sectional study design will beable to capture the phenomenon. 
This study will also involve a mixed-methods
approach. The quantitative aspect of the studywill explore relationships among strengthsself-efficacy, resourcefulness, stigma experi-ence, and mental health recovery. The predic-tion of mental health recovery from the vari-ables strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulnessand stigma experience will also be examined.Secondary research questions will beanswered using qualitative descriptivemethodology in which participants will beasked opened-ended questions regarding theuse of their personal strengths. The qualitativedata collected will be used to complement thequantative data collected to describe partici-pants’ personal strengths and the use of theirpersonal strengths pertaining to their mentalhealth.
Participants
A convenience sample will be obtained.
Participants included are community-dwellingadults having been diagnosed with SMI.Selecting the sample from the communitykeeps the bias of acute psychotic symptomsfrom affecting participants’ perception of theirrecovery. 
Power analysis was conducted a prioribased
on a medium effect size as attained from pre-vious studies,
13,23using G*Power. A total of 67
participants is required, assuming an alphalevel of P=0.05 and a power of 0.80. To be con-servative with the aim of recruiting a larger                             Protocol
Non commercial use only
                                 [Health Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209]                                                   [page 59]sample and to account for attrition, we aim to
recruit 100 participants.
Inclusion criteria
To be included in this study, participants
should be community-dwelling individuals.People in the community have fewer unmetneeds in the areas of psychological distressand psychotic symptoms than those in hospi-tal-based facilities.
24Participants included in
this study are adults 21 to 65 years old (bothinclusive) having been diagnosed with havingSMI. Participants should be mentally stableenough to understand the nature and purposeof the study. They should also be able to readthe questionnaire or understand what is spo-ken to them from the questionnaire. Theircapacity to understand will be assessed by giv-ing them information regarding the study toread or after listening to the researcher readthe information, followed by them giving anaccount of what the gist of the study is. Theinformation are based on the patient informa-tion sheet written in English and can beexplained verbally in other languages. 
Exclusion criteria
People who are currently abusing sub-
stances are excluded from the study. It hasbeen well established that the prevalence ofpsychoactive substance abuse is high amongpeople with mental illnesses like schizophre-nia.
25Research indicates that people with co-
occurring substance abuse are highly prone torelapse to substance abuse, even after theyhave attained full remission of their mental ill-nesses. They may also lack independent hous-ing, meaningful activities and social supportswhich could be necessarily for recovery.
26
Hence, the recovery of people with SMI and co-occurring substance abuse may be affected.Since this study examines recovery after men-tal illness, people with current substanceabuse are excluded from the study. 
Instruments
Strengths self-efficacy will be measured by
the Strengths Self-efficacy Scale (SSES) thatwas developed by Chaichanasakul et al.
27
Content validity of SSES was assessed inde-pendently by four experts in positive psycholo-gy. SSES was tested out with 214 participantsin the community, and yielded a high level ofinternal consistency (reliability) Cronbach’salpha is 0.97.
27
Resourcefulness will be measured by the
Resourcefulness Scale (RS) developed by
Zauszniewski et al.28RS’s items had been
examined in conjunction with the Self-controlSchedule and the Help Seeking Resource
Scale, well-known measures of personal andsocial resourcefulness respectively giving RSits construct validity. RS was tested on 451chronically ill elders yielding a high level ofinternal consistency (cronbach’s alpha=0.85). Perception of personal mental health recov-
ery will be measured by the Mental Health
Recovery Measure (MHRM) developed byYoung et al.
29MHRM had content validity
clients since it was developed using narrativedata provided by clients with psychiatric dis-abilities. Convergent validity of MHRM hasbeen demonstrated with instruments assess-ing empowerment, resilience and communityliving ability.
30MHRM is suitable for use with
the ethnically diverse population in Singapore,as it has been tested with clients from severalethnic groups with no significant differencesin mean MHRM scores between different eth-nic groups. Good internal consistency has beendemonstrated with 279 clients (cronbach’salpha=0.93).
30
Stigma experience will be measured by the
Stigma Scale (SS) developed by King et al.31
The SS assesses stigma experienced by theperson with mental illness themselves ratherthan from a third person’s viewpoint. The SS isa valid measure for the person with mental ill-ness as it was developed after in-depth inter-view with 46 clients in community mentalhealth services.
32Discriminant validity was
shown when SS was negatively correlated withglobal self-esteem. As in this study, where par-ticipants are recruited from the communitywith different SMI diagnoses, the SS had alsobeen tested on 193 participants with variedsettings and diagnoses. Good internal consis-tency has been demonstrated with 193 clients(cronbach’s alpha=0.87).
31
An interview guide was developed with
open-ended questions for the qualitative com-ponent for this research study. A prior reviewof the literature was done to identify the phe-nomenon that needed further explorationusing qualitative methodology. Questions weredeveloped in the interview guide to examinethe phenomenon of mental health recoveryfrom participants’ point of view. The literatureoffered supporting evidence regarding the con-tributions of personal strengths towards posi-tive outcomes, but little is known about per-sonal strengths in people with mental illness-es. Even more scarce was evidence linking per-sonal strengths directly to the recovery of peo-ple with mental illnesses. Hence, the interviewguide also included questions exploring situa-tions that participants use their personal
strengths and the relationships between thesestrengths and their mental health recovery.These questions were developed by the princi-pal investigator for this research study andreviewed by an experienced qualitative
researcher, and a faculty member at a renoweduniversity to ensure its validity to the purposeof this study.
Data collection
After obtaining ethical clearance to com-
mence the study, a pilot study will be conduct-ed on about 5 to 10 people with serious mental
illness who meet the inclusion and exclusioncriteria to test the feasibility of using theinstruments in this study and the feasibility ofconducting the full-scale study. They will fill upthe instruments and provide their opinionsabout the instruments. Following which, theresearchers will get together as a team toreview the feedback of responents to the pilotstudy. The research team will decide ifchanges to the instruments were needed. Ifchanges to the instruments were needed, themodified instruments will be sent back to theoriginal authors of the instruments for theirreview and the ethics review board will beinformed of the amendments to the study.Study amendments will also be done if theinstruments were found not to be feasible forthis study and new instruments were to beused. If no changes were made to the instru-ments and the researchers find that it is feasi-ble to continue, the full scale study will be con-ducted.
With permission, posters will also be put up
and flyers distributed at community mentalhealth agencies like day care centers, or club-houses, outpatient clinics around Singapore.These agencies only accepts patients who havebeen diagnosed with serious mental illnesses.Researchers just provide their contact infor-mation without seeking the records of poten-tial participants. Potential participants whowere interested in the study contactresearchers on their own accord. This mini-mizes coercion of participating in the study. 
Potential participants will approach the
researchers directly or express their interest toparticipate through telephonic or electroniccommunication after reviewing the postersand flyers. The principal investigator will thenscreen the potential participants for their eligi-bility to participate in the study based on theinclusion and exclusion criteria. Only the prin-cipal investigator will be involved in thescreening to minimize bias. If the potentialparticipants were eligible and were interestedto participate, they will meet with a researcherat a mutually agreed upon time and venue forinformed consent taking and data collection.
The researcher will be trained prior to com-
mencement of the study obtain consent,administer the instruments and conduct inter-views with participants. The instruments willalso be administered to all participants in aspecified order to control for testing effects.The Mental Health Recovery Measure whichassesses recovery, the main outcome of inter-est will be administered first. This is followedby the Strengths Self-efficacy Scale.Participants will be shown the definition ofpersonal strengths and then asked to list theirstrengths. If they have difficulty identifyingtheir strengths, they will be asked to thinkabout situations when they have felt having                                                                                                                           Protocol
Non commercial use only
[page 60]                                                    [Health Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209]accomplished something. Then, participants
will answer questions regarding the use oftheir personal strengths in different situa-tions. Subsequently, the Resourcefulness Scaleand the Stigma Scale will be administered tothe participants, followed by the questionnaireto assess their socio-demographic informa-tion. All the instruments will be administeredin the form of a structured interview where theresearcher or data collectors will read out thequestions and record participants’ response.Administering the questionnaires in the formof a structured interview greatly increased theresponse rate about 80% as compared tomailed or web-based questionnaires that typi-cally obtained responses rates of 50% orlower.
33In addition, the structured interview
also gives researchers control over the orderswhich questions are answered and minimizethe possibility of having missing responses,thus reducing bias in the results.
33
Should the participant ask for clarification,
the researchers or data collectors will onlyrepeat the questions or define the terminologyin a pre-determined manner but reframe fromgiving further interpretation. This is to ensurethat the same information will be transmittedto the participants in a similar mannerwhether it is the principal investigator,researchers or data collectors who will bemeeting with the participants. It is also for thisreason that inter-rater reliability will not beassessed as the questions are already stated inthe instruments and the researchers or datacollectors are merely present to deliver theinstruments to participants. 
A short interview will follow the question-
naires administration. The principal investiga-tor or her representative will ask participants’questions according to the interview guide.Participants are again asked to base theiranswers on their own views and to answertruthfully without any concern for incorrectanswers as there are no right or wronganswers. Having such reassurance mayincrease the chance that participants willrespond truthfully, thus enhancing the chancethat data valid to the participants are collected.To further increase the validity of the data,researchers will verify his/her understandingof participants’ response verbally before theresponses are recorded, thus giving the partic-ipants an opportunity to correct any errorsbefore records are finalized. This provides anopportunity for participants to recognize theresponses to be true to them, hence increasingthe credibility of the findings later on.
34
Data analysis
Social Package for Statistical Science will be
used for data analysis. Descriptive statisticswill describe the demographic characteristicsof the sample. Reverse scoring will be done asneeded and the mean scores of strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulness, mental health recov-
ery, and stigma experience score will be noted.Missing values will be assessed to determine ifthe missing cases are missing at randomwhere the results of the study will not bebiased. Researchers will also ensure that theassumptions of statistical procedures are met.The probability value, P will be set at 0.05.Results are considered significant when P isbelow 0.05. 
Correlation analysis such as Pearson
Product Moment Correlation will explore therelationships among i) strengths self-efficacy,ii) resourcefulness, iii) stigma experience andiv) perception of personal mental health recov-ery and socio-demographic variables. 
Linear regression will examine the predic-
tions of i) strengths self-efficacy, ii) resource-fulness, iii) stigma experience on iv) percep-tion of personal mental health recovery. If pre-dictions are significant, socio-demographiccovariates that were correlated with the out-come of iv) perception of personal mentalhealth recovery will be entered as a secondstep to the regression model to examine if thepredictions still hold after adjusting for thepresence of the socio-demographic covariates. 
Qualitative analysis will be done for the sec-
ondary research questions of how participantsuse the personal strengths pertaining to theirmental health. The recorded responses willtranscribed for analysis. Analysis of the tran-script took place over a number of phases as inthe process of thematic analysis outlined byBraun and Clarke.
35In phase 1, the entire tran-
script was read through to gain an overview ofparticipants’ responses. This was followed byphase 2 where categories or codes were gener-ated for meaning units of data that represent-ed a certain idea. The transcript was re-arranged such that extracts of participants’responses representing each category wereplaced together. The number of extracts andthe number of participants who provided theextracts were noted. In the third phase, thecategories were reviewed to derive at potentialthemes. Themes are the broader, over-archingconstruct that represent units of data. Sixpotential themes namely, i) use of personalstrengths to understand other people, ii) useof compassion to help other people, iii) use ofpersonal strengths to work, iv) use of personalstrengths for personal growth, v) use of per-sonal strengths for individual development, vi)use of personal strengths for mental healthwere derived. The data was collated within thepotential themes identified. The transcript wasagain re-arranged such that extracts repre-senting similar themes were placed together.In phase 4, these potential themes were fur-ther refined. Every category of extracts that fellunder each potential theme was reviewed
again to determine if the theme was repre-sented in the data. Potential themes with toolittle data to support the themes were com-
bined and renamed. The principal investigatorthen re-read the transcript with the themes inmind to ensure accuracy. The process of analy-sis might also be repeated and themes revisedso that the themes could accurately reflect themeaning of the data in the end.
Ethical considerations
Ethical clearance will be sought a priori.
Information about the study will be provided.Participation is entirely voluntary. Refusal orwithdrawal from the study will not affect thehealthcare services provided. Some peoplemay experience discomfort answering ques-tions for this study. If need be, referral may bemade to mental health professionals.Identifying information found in the consentforms will be kept under lock and key. Data col-lection forms will be de-identified.
Rigor
This study was designed to enhance validity
without compromising the feasibility of con-ducting the study. Employing a cross-sectionalstudy design with convenience sampling inthis study though provide researcher little con-trol over events that occurred, unlike an exper-imental study, it can overcome several threatsto the internal validity of the study to show thatthe link (relationships or predictions, if estab-lished) between the independent variable anddependent variable is true without the inter-ference of other events. According to Polit andBeck,
33pre-test post-test study design is most
likely to be affected by the threat to history,maturation, testing and instrumentation whileexperimental study can most likely to be affect-ed by the threat to mortality. Although thecross-sectional design limits the examinationof changes over a period of time, such a designprevents many of these other threats to theinternal validity of the study.
External validity deals with whether the
results of the study can be generalized to otherpersons, places or times.
21However, control-
ling for one type of validity interferes with thepossibility of achieving another type of validity.For example, having a homogenous sample inthe study strengthens internal validity but canlimit external validity.
33In this study, conven-
ience sampling will be used without excessivecontrol over the characteristics of participantsto be included in the study, so that participantsstill bear some characteristics of the targetpopulation of adults with serious mental ill-nesses. Furthermore, this study will take placelargely in the natural setting without manipu-                             Protocol
Non commercial use only
                                 [Health Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209]                                                   [page 61]lation of variables as in an experimental study,
further enhancing the generalizability of theresults. 
The rigor of study data could also be deter-
mined by its credibility, dependability, con-firmability and transferability.
34A mixed
method study design allows for qualitative datato complement the superficial information thatare typical in a survey instrument, furtherenhancing the credibility of the study. Self-reported data collected in this study could bemost valid to the participants’ experiences andresearchers taking the extra step of verifyingparticipants’ responses (also known as mem-ber checking) enhanced the credibility of theresults.
33
The same research team will analyze the
data to enhance internal consistency andhelped to ensure that the results of analysisremained stable for every participant, henceenhancing its dependability. With regards toconfirmability, the methods for conducting thisstudy will be stipulated in the protocol prior tostudy commencement and will be closelyadhered to. This will leave an audit trail forfuture researchers to replicate the study toconfirm the findings further. 
Transferability of the data can be enhanced
when researchers give a detailed explanationof the results including the socio demographiccharacteristics of the participants in this studylater on in the research report so that futureresearchers can get a sense of what kind ofcontext or population the results can apply to.
33
Discussion
It is well documented that the experience of
stigma has been plaguing people with mentalillnesses and impeding their recovery. Thisstudy will not only examines stigma and recov-ery from the perspective of people with mentalillnesses as opposed to a third party but alsoallow the examination of positive conceptssuch as strengths self-efficacy and resource-fulness capabilities of people with mental ill-nesses. However, research participants maynot benefit directly from participating in thisstudy. Hence, in promoting the study to poten-tial research participants, this would have tobe presented to participants. Nevertheless
knowledge gained from this study may pavethe way for positive strengths-based nursingstrategies to be developed to aid mental healthrecovery, possibly leading to a more compre-hensive recovery program for people with men-tal illnesses. This may in turn benefit partici-pants in future when patients can choose froma greater variety of treatment strategies. 
Despite this being a non-invasive study, par-
ticipants risks associated with daily living maystill be expected to occur during the study.Participants will be advised beforehand to
inform the principal investigator or her repre-sentative if they feel uncomfortable or becomedistressed while answering a certain question.If participants were to become distressed inthe process of answering questions for theresearch study, they would be given a break tillthey are ready to continue or decide to with-draw from the study. Participants may also begiven contact information of mental healthservices where participants can approach forhelp when they need it. 
Limitations
There are limitations inherent to conven-
ience sampling in the local setting. In particu-lar, with the limited sample size and use ofconvenience sampling in the local setting, gen-eralizing the findings of the study beyond thecontext requires further scrunity. As the studywill be conducted in the community setting,participants may not be hidden from the pub-lic’s eye. Participants are asked to choose a pri-vate venu where they are comfortable with fill-ing up the questionaires and undergoing theinterview.
Conclusions 
The personal strengths of human beings
may be illuminated in adversities like mentalillnesses. After years of studying human weak-nesses and psychological pathology, this studyrepresents a preliminary attempt in the scien-tific pursuit of human strengths that broughtabout positive outcome in adversities.Findings could expand our knowledge aboutrecovery from mental illnesses by focusing onpersonal strengths and positive concepts suchas strengths self-efficacy, resourcefulness andmental health recovery. 
Findings from this current study could aid in
propelling the field of psychiatry away fromdeficit preoccupation to positive qualities ofindividuals with mental health issue such asstrengths self-efficacy and resourcefulness.
Approaching mental illnesses positively couldhelp to reduce the stigma that impeded therecovery of people with mental illnesses.
References
1. The WHO World Mental Health Survey
Consortium. Prevalence, severity, and
unmet need for treatment of mental disor-ders in the World Health Organizationworld mental health survey. JAMA
2004;291:2581-90. 
2. World Health Organization. World Mental
Health Day 2006: Building Awareness -Reducing Risks: Suicide and MentalIllness. Available from:http://www.who.int/mediacentre/news/releases/2006/pr53/en/index.html
3. Murray CJL, Lopez AD, eds. Global burden
of disease. A comprehensive assessmentof mortality and disability from diseases,injuries, and risk factors in 1990 and pro-jected to 2020. Geneva: WHO; 1996.
4. Chong SA. Mental health in Singapore: a
quiet revolution? Ann Acad Med 2007;36:795-6.
5. Saleebey D. The strengths perspective in
social work practice. 4th ed. Boston: MA:Pearson/Allyn & Bacon; 2006.
6. Anthony WA. Recovery from mental illness:
the guiding vision of the mental healthservice system in the 1990s. PsychosomRehabil J 1993;16:11-23.
7. Farkas M. The vision of recovery today:
what it is and what it means for services.World Psychiatry 2007;6:68-74.
8. Cloninger CR. The science of well-being:
an integrated approach to mental healthand its disorders. World Psychiatry2006;5:71-6.
9. Yang LH. Application of mental illness stig-
ma theory to Chinese societies: synthesisand new directions. Singapore Med J2007;48:977-85.
10. Link BG, Struening EL, Neese-Todd S, et
al. Stigma as a barrier to recovery: the con-sequences of stigma for the self-esteem ofpeople with mental illnesses. PsychiatrServ 2001;52:1621-6.
11. Department of Health and Human
Services, DHHS. Mental Health: a report ofthe surgeon general-executive summary.1999. Available from: http://mentalhealth.about.com/library/sg/blsummary.htm
12. Oades LG, Deane FP, Crowe TP, et al.
Collaborative recovery: an integrativemodel for working with individuals whoexperience chronic and recurring mentalillness. Australasian Pshychiatry2005;13:279-84.  
13. Peterson C, Park N, Seligman MEP.
Greater strengths of character and recov-ery from illness. J Posit Psychol 2006;1:17-26.
14. Epstein MH, Ruldolph S, Epstein AA.
Strength based assessment. TeachingExceptional Children 2000;32:50-4. 
15. Hodges TD, Clifton DO. Strengths-based
development in practice. In: Linley PA,Joseph S, Eds. Positive psychology in prac-tice. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons Inc;2004. pp 256-268.
16. Bullock WA, Sage J, Hupp D, et al. Mental
health, from illness to wellness: an evalua-tion of Ohio’s wellness management andrecovery program in community mentalhealth and consumer-operated serviceagencies. New Res Ment Health                                                                                                                           Protocol
Non commercial use only
[page 62]                                                    [Health Psychology Research 2015; 3:2209]2009;18:312-21.
17. Bekhet AK, Zauszniewski JA, Wykle ML.
Milieu change and relocation adjustment
in elders. West J Nurs Res 2008;30:113-29. 
18. Musil C, Warner C, Zauszniewski J, et al.
Grandmother caregiving, family stress andstrain and depressive symptoms. West JNurs Res 2009;31:389-408. 
19. Zauszniewski JA, Bekhet A, Suresky M.
Relationships among perceived burden,depressive cognitions, resourcefulness,and quality of life in female relatives ofseriously mentally ill adults. Issues MentHealth Nurs 2009;30:142-50.
20. Alasia A, Bollman R, Parkins J, Reimer B.
An index of community vulnerability:Conceptual framework and application topopulation and employment changes.Research Report N. 088. 2001. Availablefrom: http://dsppsd.pwgsc.gc.ca/collec-tion_2008/statcan/21-601-M/21-601-MIE2008088.pdf 
21. Schneider Z, Elliott D, Lo-Biondo-Wood G,
Haber J. Nursing research: methods, criti-cal appraisal and utilization. New SouthWales, Australia: Elsevier; 2003.
22. Johnson RB, Onwuegbuzie AJ. Mixed
methods research: a research paradigmwhose time has come. Educat Res2004;33:14-26. 23. Zauszniewski JA, Picot SJ, Roberts BL, et
al. Predictors of resourcefulness in AfricanAmerican women. J Aging Health2005;17:609-33.
24. Killaspy H, Rambarran D, Bledin K. Mental
health needs of clients of rehabilitationservices: a survey in one trust. J MentalHealth 2008;17:207-18.
25. Dervaux A, Laqueille X, Bourdel MC, et al.
Cannabis and schizophrenia: demographicand clinical correlates. Encephale2003;29:11-7.
26. Drake RE, Wallach ME, McGovern MP.
Special section on relapse prevention:future directions in preventing relapse tosubstance abuse among clients withsevere mental illnesses. Psychiatr Serv2005;56:1297-302. 
27. Chaichanasakul A, Tsai CL, Zhao R, et al.
Development and initial validation of thestrengths self-efficacy scale. Doctoral dis-sertation. University of Missouri andClifton Strengths School & Gallup,Columbia, MO. 2009.
28. Zauszniewski JA, Lai CY,
Tithiphontumrong S. Development andtesting of the resourcefulness scale forolder adults. J Nurs Measur 2006;14:57-68.
29. Young SL, Ensing DS. Exploring recovery
from the perspective of people with psychi-atric disabilities. Psychiatr Rehabil J
1999;22:219-31. 
30. Bullock W.A. Mental health recovery meas-
ure. In: Campbell-Orde T, Chamberlin J,Carpenter J, Leff HS., Eds. Measuring thepromise of recovery: a compendium ofrecovery measures. Cambridge, MA: TheEvaluation Center; 2005.
31. King M, Dinos S, Shaw J, et al. The stigma
scale: development of a standardisedmeasure of the stigma of mental illness.Br J Psychiatry 2007;190:248-54.
32. Dinos S, Stevens S, Serfaty M, et al.
Stigma: the feelings and experiences of 46people with mental illness. Br J Psychiatry2004;184:176-81. 
33. Polit DF, Beck CT. Nursing research: prin-
ciples and methods. 7th ed. Philadelphia:Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2004.
34. Speziale HJS, Carpenter DR. Qualitative
research in nursing: advancing thehumanistic imperative. 4th ed.Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams &Wilkins; 2007.
35. Braun V, Clarke V. Using thematic analysis
in psychology. Qual Res Psychol 2006;3:77-101.
                             Protocol
Non commercial use only
